ON
SEPTEMBER 20TH, TWO THOUSAND
TWENTY THREE ELECTRONIC MEETING
OF THE ARBOR TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION, THIS MEETING IS
BEING HELD ELECTRONICALLY BUT
WE INTEND TO CONDUCT THIS
MEETING SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ZOOME ONLY TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND ENTER MEETING ID
NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN OR JOIN VIA THE.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE IN THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICES
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON CHANNEL 16.
>> SO RECORDING IN PROGRESS.
>> SO CHRIS, IF YOU COULD
PLEASE CALL OK NOW KOROL I
RECEIVED REQUEST FROM
COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON AND
MARGOLESE WILL NOW BE ABLE TO
ATTEMPT TO SEE HERE AND FROM
WHERE YOU'RE DIALING YOUR NAME
IS CALLED COMMISSIONER BULLMAN
HERE ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
ECKMANN HERE AND ARBER
COMMISSIONER BROGAN HERE FROM
COMMISSIONER TOMOKI HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER HOOK
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER, OUR KILLER IS THE
MAN OUR COMMISSIONER CLAMAN
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER, WE HEAR FROM ANN
ARBOR, COMMISSIONER ANDERSON
HERE FROM ANN.
OK, COMMISSIONER HAS HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR LIEUTENANT MIKE
SHERMAN HERE FROM TYRONNE
TOWNSHIP.
>> OK, WE HAVE QUORUM.
THANK YOU.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
CONSENT AGENDA APPROVAL OF THE
AGENDA AND APPROVAL OF THE
MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
CONSENT TO GENDER, MOLLY?
>> OH SORRY.
I THOUGHT THAT WAS MY CAT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
OK WITH THAT IF THERE IS A
MOTION TO APPROVE THE CONSENT
AGENDA AS PRESENTED MOTION BY
WARU SECONDED IT AGAIN ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION
PLEASE SAY YES.
>> RAISE YOUR HAND.
YES.
OH AS OPPOSED PLEASE SAY NO OR
RAISE YOUR HAND.
THEY CONSENT AGENDA IS APPROVED
PUBLIC COMMENT THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR PERSONS TO
SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES
AGAIN IF YOU'D LIKE TO SPEAK
PLEASE CALL TWO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND ANSWER MEETING I'D
NINE THREE FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT
FIVE TWO NINE ZERO SEVEN OR
COLLECTIVISM AS DESCRIBED ON
THE AGENDA CITY STAFF SELECT
CALLERS THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR
HAND ONE BY ONE USING THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE
NUMBER OR THE PERSONS IN MIND
IN ORDER TO ELECTRONICALLY
RAISE YOUR HAND TO INDICATE
YOUR DESIRE TO SPEAK PLEASE
PRESS STAR ON YOUR PHONE OR
SELECT THE RIGHT HAND BUTTON
AND YOU'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK SPEAKING
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
MUTE ANY TELEVISION BACKGROUND
SOUND SO THAT WE CAN HEAR YOU
CLEARLY.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS.
SEE?
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE FIRST SPEAKER IS CLARK
MATZKE CLARK GONE AHEAD AND
MUTED YOU.
THE FLOOR IS YOURS.
YOU HAVE THREE MINUTES.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
I KNOW ONE OF THE THINGS WILL
BE TAKING UP THE EVENING HAS TO
DO WITH CROSSING US TWENTY
THREE THEN NON MOTORIZED
FASHION.
WHEN I WAS YOUNGER BACOLOD I
USED TO HAVE TO DO THAT AND I
TRIED SEVERAL CROSSINGS AND
IT'S NOT A VERY PLEASANT THING
TO DO.
IN FACT IT'S DANGEROUS AT TIMES
SO I FULLY SUPPORT YOUR WORK
THAT YOU'LL BE UNDERTAKING TO
GET HIM TO IMPROVE THE CROSSING
OF U.S. TWENTY THREE THAT
EXPRESSWAY ALSO OFTEN SERVES AS
A BARRIER BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE COUNTY AND IT'S
BEST TO TRY TO LINK THAT AS
MUCH AS POSSIBLE.
ALSO I'D LIKE TO WELCOME LARRY
KEELER TO YOUR COMMITTEE.
I'VE HAD THE PLEASURE
OF WORKING WITH HIM ON THE
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE
LOCAL ADVISORY COUNCIL OR THE
RIDE AND IT'S A PLEASURE
WORKING WITH HIM AND HE'LL BE A
PRODUCTIVE MEMBER OF YOUR
COMMITTEE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> I'M NOT SEEING ANY PUBLIC
COMMENTARIES SOMEBODY JUST
CALLED IN OK, THERE'S A HAND
RAISED HER.
YEAH.
CALLER WITH THE LAST THREE
DIGITS NINE FIVE FIVE I'VE GONE
AHEAD AND ALLOWED YOU TO SPEAK
GO AHEAD AND MUTE YOURSELF ON
THE FLOOR IS YOURS.
HI GOOD EVENING THIS IS KIRK
WESTFALL THIRTY FIVE BY FIVE
CHARTER PLEASE.
I JUST WANTED TO COMMENT ON A
COUPLE ITEMS ON THE AGENDA.
ONE WAS THE US TWENTY THREE
RESOLUTION AND ALSO THE ROAD
DIET DISCUSSION WITH REGARD TO
THE US TWENTY THREE RESOLUTION
I DEFINITELY SUPPORT THE CALL
FOR REEVALUATING RESOURCES TO
IMPROVE NON MOTORIZED
CONNECTIONS BUT I'D ASK YOU TO
CONSIDER ADDING A PHRASE OR A
RESOLVE CLAUSE THAT EXPLICITLY
RECOMMENDS AGAINST ADDING LANES
TO US TWENTY THREE IN ANY FORM
AND THAT'S PRESENTATION TO
STAKEHOLDERS EARLIER IN THE
YEAR WHICH THEY DON'T LINK TO
ON THEIR PROJECT INFORMATION
AGE MAKES IT PRETTY CLEAR THAT
THEY EXPECT TO ADD LANES EITHER
SO-CALLED FLEX LANES OR HLV OR
GENERAL-PURPOSE LANES.
I THINK MANY OF US RECOGNIZE
THAT THERE'S DEEP FISCAL AND
CULTURAL FAILURES AND THAT AND
THEIR OVERSIGHT BOARD AND
DIRECTOR ARE THE RESPONSIBILITY
OF THE GOVERNOR AND THIS IS
LEADING THEM TO CONTINUE THE
JUST INSANITY OF CREATING NEW
CAR CAPACITY.
WE CAN HOPE FOR BETTER
LEADERSHIP IN THE FUTURE.
BUT IN THE MEANTIME I THINK
IT'S UP TO ME MUNICIPALITIES TO
PROTECT OURSELVES AND EXERT
WHATEVER PRESSURE WE CAN UNDER
NOT ONLY ARE WE THE CITY WITH
THE HIGHEST NUMBER OF LANE
MILES PER PERSON BUT AND HAVE
ZERO PLANS FOR MAINTAINING
LANES, ADDING I WOULD
DEFINITELY GOING TO WORK
AGAINST OUR EMISSIONS
REDUCTIONS GOALS AND BRING MORE
DRIVERS AND MORE POLLUTION INTO
OUR BORDERS.
AND I DON'T KNOW IF YOU'VE HAD
CONVERSATIONS WITH THE COUNTY
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS BUT I'D
HOPE THAT THEY WOULD BE
INCLINED TO EXPRESS THEIR
OBJECTION TO END WORKING
AGAINST THEIR OWN VMT REDUCTION
.
THE OTHER ITEM IS RHODIA.
MY OWN BELIEF IS THAT WE'RE
TRULY A ZERO COMMUNITY
RHODESIA'S SHOULDN'T JUST BE
CONSIDERED AS A TOOL THAT'S IN
THE MENU OF OPTIONS.
I BELIEVE THAT THEY SHOULD BE
DEPLOYED IMMEDIATELY WITH PAINT
AT FIRST JUST NECESSARY
SECONDS OF I THINK HE THERE WAS
AN ISSUE
THAT I THINK I WAS
MUTED IN MY IN MY BACK ON WAS
MY TIME.
>> YES.
YES OR WE'LL START FROM THE 30
SECONDS SECONDS BUT OK SO I
THINK THAT BROADFORD SHOULD BE
DEPLOYED IMMEDIATELY BUT
THERE'S NO MULTI LANE ROADS.
LIEUTENANT AABA, I DON'T KNOW
WHAT'S GOING TO BE PRESENTED TO
YOU TONIGHT BUT IF THE CITY IS
THAT WE SHOULD PRESERVE ANY
OF OUR EXISTING MULTI LANE
ROADS, I HOPE WE CAN BE
PROVIDED WITH EXAMPLES OF SUCH
ROADS AND CITIES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY THAT HAVE SEEN NO
SERIOUS INJURIES OTHERWISE I
THINK PRESERVING MULTI LANE
ROADS IS JUST SIMPLY AN
INHERENT VIOLATION OF OUR
PROMISE TO ELIMINATE ROAD
INJURIES.
THANKS FOR TAKING MY CALL AND
LOOK FORWARD TO THE DISCUSSION
.
THANK YOU.
THANK ANYONE ELSE THAT WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK THIS WEEK PLEASE
RAISE YOUR HAND
.
HEY SAYING NO THANK YOU TO ALL
THE MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC FOR
YOUR VALUABLE COMMENTS THIS
EVENING BUT ALSO DIRECTED THIS
YEAR TO THE EMAILS WE'VE
RECEIVED THAT ARE PART OF OUR
PACKET THREE OR FOUR EMAILS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE FIRST ITEM OF BUSINESS LIKE
PEDESTRIAN CROSSING IS TWENTY
THREE.
SO THAT HAS STARTED AN
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT STUDY
FOR US TWENTY THREE BETWEEN 14
AND FOUR CITY STARTS PROVIDING
INPUT ON THIS INITIATIVE AND
WOULD LIKE US TO CONSIDER A
RESOLUTION WHICH YOU'VE SEEN OR
RECEIVED ADVOCATING FOR BETTER
BIKE AND PEDESTRIAN
ACCOMMODATIONS ACROSS THE US.
TWENTY THREE SO READ SOME
ADDITIONAL BACKGROUND AND YOU
CAN REVIEW THE DRAFT RESOLUTION
THAT'S INCLUDED IN THE PACKET.
PLEASE.
>> YES, HAPPY TO DO THAT.
I WILL GO AHEAD AND SHARE MY
SCREEN, PULL THE RESOLUTION ON
THE SCREEN THAT IS SHOWING FOR
EVERYBODY.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO YES AND THAT IS STUDYING US
TWENTY THREE TRUNK LINE
OPERATIONS AND AS ONE OF OUR
PUBLIC SPEAKERS MENTIONED, IT'S
PROBABLY NOT A SURPRISE THAT
THAT MIGHT BE CONSIDERING SOME
CAPACITY ISSUES.
THEY ARE KIND OF IN THE VERY
BEGINNING THROES OF THIS
INITIATIVE AND ONE OF THE
THINGS IF YOU'RE FAMILIAR WITH
THE ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
PROCESS, ONE OF THE IMPORTANT
FIRST STEPS IS TO DEVELOP
PURPOSE AND NEED WHICH REALLY
ESTABLISHES THE FRAMEWORK BY
WHICH THE PROJECT IS GOING TO
BE EVALUATED BY.
RIGHT.
IT'S KIND OF THE SORT
OF GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF THE
STUDY AND SO NOT IS CURRENTLY
WORKING ON A PURPOSE AND NEED.
AND SO AND SOME OF THE
DISCUSSIONS THAT OUR TEAM HAS
INVOLVED IN THERE DOES NOT SEEM
TO BE AS MUCH ATTENTION BEING
PAID TO BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN
ACCOMMODATIONS.
NOW THAT MAY MAKE SENSE ON US.
>> TWENTY THREE PROPER WHY
BIKES ARE NOT ACCOMMODATED ON
THE FREEWAY BUT AS I THINK YOU
ALL KNOW NOT OWENS AND OPERATES
AND CONTROLS ANY OF THE
STRUCTURES THAT GO OVER UNDER
OR AN INTERCHANGE WITH A
FREEWAY.
>> SO EVEN IF THE CITY OWNS FOR
EXAMPLE, BOTH SIDES OF THE ROAD
ON EITHER SIDE OF THE BRIDGE
ITSELF IS OWNED BY AND SO THOSE
BRIDGES TEND TO PRESENT A BIT
OF A CHOKING POINT AND A
BARRIER ESPECIALLY FOR NON
MOTORIZED TRAVEL.
AND SO WHEN WE KIND OF SAW THE
DIRECTION THE STUDY WAS HEADED,
WE THOUGHT THERE SHOULD
PROBABLY BE A GREATER EMPHASIS
ON THAT.
AND SO WE DRAFTED THE
RESOLUTION THAT'S INCLUDED IN
YOUR PACKET FOR CONSIDERATION
IF YOU KNOW THIS IS SOMETHING
OF THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION REPORT THEN IT WE
WILL SIGNIFY THAT THE CITY
COUNCIL AND A CITY COUNCIL
DECIDES TO TAKE A RESOLUTION AS
WELL THEN IT WOULD BE KIND
OF ENTERED INTO THE RECORD WITH
WITH NOW THAT'S NO GUARANTEE
THAT FERGUSON WILL CHANGE OR
THINGS LIKE THAT.
BUT IT'S AT LEAST STATING THE
CITY'S POSITION.
>> SO THERE ARE SEVERAL WHEREAS
CLAUSES THE PREAMBLE OTTERY
CLAUSES KIND OF GIVING SOME
HISTORY ON US.
TWENTY THREE IDENTIFYING THAT
THERE ARE EIGHT CROSSINGS ALONG
US TWENTY THREE WITHIN AN HOUR
THAT YOU'VE HAD A LOT
OF DEVELOPMENT WITH YEARS
THAT'S LED TO A MIX
OF DIFFERENT USES AND THAT
THESE USES HAVE GENERATED
DEPEND ACROSS US.
TWENTY THREE FOR ALL WALKS
OF LIFE AND ALL MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION AND BUT ALONG
THOSE LINES THE WALKING AND
BICYCLING ENVIRONMENT TENDS TO
BE INCOMPLETE OR HOSTILE.
AND THEN WHEN WE TALK ABOUT THE
CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN AND MODE
SHIFT TO WALKING, BIKING AND
TRANSIT AS WELL AS OUR VISION
ZERO PLANS TO IMPROVING SAFETY
AND COMFORT FOR PEOPLE WALKING
AND BIKING AS WELL AS CREATING
AN ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
BICYCLE NETWORK.
>> THEN THERE'S ANOTHER CLAUSE
TALKING ABOUT WALKING AND
BIKING PROMOTES HEALTHY,
EQUITABLE, SOCIALLY CONNECTED
AND ECONOMICALLY VITAL
COMMUNITIES AND THEN
IDENTIFYING THEM THAT IS IN THE
PROCESS OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENT STUDY THAT THERE IS
A PROJECT IDENTIFIED FOR
UPWARDS OF TWO HUNDRED FIFTY
MILLION DOLLARS TO MAKE AN
IMPROVEMENT.
SO ON US TWENTY THREE.
BUT IT HAS KIND OF INDICATED ON
THE ONSET THAT BRIDGES AND
OVERPASSES THAT ARE NOT
REQUIRED TO BE REPLACED WILL BE
PRESERVED AS IT IS AND WILL BE
EXCLUDED FROM THE PROJECT'S
SCOPE AND BUDGET.
SO THE RESOLVE CLAUSE IS READ
AS FOLLOWS RESOLVED.
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCIL
PASSED A RESOLUTION THAT
REQUESTS THE MICHIGAN
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
INCLUDE SAFE, COMFORTABLE
WALKING AND BIKING FACILITIES
ON ALL EIGHT US TWENTY THREE
CROSSINGS AS A SPECIFIC PURPOSE
AND NEED AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENT RESOLVED.
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCIL
PASSED A RESOLUTION THAT
REQUEST THE MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT
TRANSPORTATION REEVALUATE THE
RESOURCES NEEDED TO REBUILD THE
US TWENTY THREE FREEWAY WHILE
COMPLETING THE WALKING AND
BIKING CONNECTIONS ACROSS THE
US TWENTY THREE AND THEN
FINALLY RESOLVE THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCIL
DIRECT
STAFF TO COORDINATE WITH
HANOVER TOWNSHIP, PITTSFIELD
TOWNSHIP, WASHTENAW COUNTY ROAD
PORTION OF WASHTENAW COUNTY
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
AND THE MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION TO BUILD
CONTINUOUS COMFORTABLE SAFE
PLACES FOR PEOPLE TO WALK AND
BIKE ACROSS THE ENTIRE U.S..
TWENTY THREE ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENT STUDY AREA AND SO
WITH THAT THAT'S KIND OF THAT'S
THE HIGHLIGHTS THAT I WANTED TO
SHARE WITH YOU ALL AND I'M
HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
YOU MAY HAVE OR TURN IT BACK
OVER TO YOU ALL FOR DISCUSSION
.
YEAH.
WHAT QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS DO
PEOPLE HAVE ON THIS PROPOSED
RESOLUTION WE RAISE YOUR HANDS
OR JUST CAN THOUGH, CAN YOU
RAYMOND, CAN YOU REFRESH ME ON
WHAT THE EIGHT DIFFERENT AREAS
OR THE EIGHT DIFFERENT
CROSSINGS THAT WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE?
IS THERE GOING TO BE HOW IS
THIS GOING TO NECESSARILY
DIRECT COUNCIL THIS A BLANKET
APPROACH THING THAT WE WANT
PRIORITIZE BIKING MORE THAN WE
HAVE FOR ALL OF THESE CROSSINGS
OR ARE WE GOING TO SAY LIKE FOR
WASHTENAW AVENUE WHERE US WHERE
THEY TOLD US THAT THERE'S GOING
TO BE A LIMITED AMOUNT OF RIGHT
AWAY EVEN THAT OUR MY AGENCY
HAS BEEN ASKING FOR AN EXPANDED
FOOTPRINT FOR EXTRA LANES?
>> I GUESS I'M KIND OF CURIOUS
ABOUT HOW THIS IS GOING TO
AFFECT THE BALANCE OF WHAT
WE'RE ADVOCATING FOR ON SOME
OF THESE CROSSINGS OF ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION VERSUS TRANSIT
AND THEN ON MOST OF THESE
CROSSINGS I UNDERSTAND THAT
ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION
DEFINITELY I WOULD SUPPORT
THOSE BUT LIKE IN THE WASHTENAW
CORRIDOR I GUESS I'M HAVING
MIXED FEELINGS ON THAT RIGHT
NOW JUST DUE TO THE FACT THAT
WE ALL KNOW THAT ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION DOES SERVE A
VERY IMPORTANT NEED.
BUT IF WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
COMMUTERS COMING INTO THE CITY,
HOW MANY EVER TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF CARS THAT WE HAVE ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION IS NOT GOING TO
SERVE AS THE PRIMARY MODE TO BE
ABLE TO ACCOMMODATE MOST
OF THOSE.
SO IS THERE COULD THERE BE ANY
SORT OF ACKNOWLEDGMENT THAT AT
LEAST IN THE WASHTENAW CORRIDOR
THAT THERE COULD PREFERENCE
GIVEN TO TRANSIT AND THEN
ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION ALSO
PLAYS A ROLE IN THERE OR DOES
THIS HAVE TO BE A GENERALIZED
STATEMENT ABOUT, YOU KNOW,
BASICALLY APPLYING THE SAME
STANDARDS TO ALL THE CROSSINGS
?
YEAH, I'LL ATTEMPT A RESPONSE
AND I DON'T THINK THERE'S A
RIGHT ANSWER.
A WRONG ANSWER.
I THINK ALL WHEN WE DRAFTED
THIS WHAT WE HAD IN MIND WAS
REALLY JUST TRYING TO PUT ON
THE RADAR FOR NOT A SORT
OF CONSIDERATION OR
ACCOMMODATION FOR BY ACROSS ALL
OF THE UNDERPASSES, OVERPASSES
AND INTERCHANGES.
I'M OF THE OPINION AND GRANTED
I KNOW THIS IS RESOURCES AND
THERE ARE DIFFERENT THINGS AT
PLAY HERE BUT I'M OF THE
OPINION THAT THOSE NEED NOT BE
EITHER OR WHEN IT COMES TO
TRANSIT ESPECIALLY YOU TALK
ABOUT THE WASHTENAW CORRIDOR.
I UNDERSTAND AND APPRECIATE
RESPECT THE RIGHTS POSITION
ABOUT FOR EXAMPLE I KNOW THE
RIGHTS LONG RANGE PLAN TALKS
ABOUT TALKS ABOUT WASHTENAW
MAYBE A BUS RAPID TRANSIT
CORRIDOR THAT I'VE SEEN IN SOME
COMMUNITIES WHERE YOU CAN HAVE
ADEQUATE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR
TRANSIT AS WELL AS BIKE PATHS
THROUGH INTERCHANGE.
WHAT WE TRY NOT TO DO IS
SPECIFY THE LEVEL OF DESIGN OR
DETAIL THAT IS APPROPRIATE OR
WHAT THE ACCOMMODATION SHOULD
BE THAT THAT PROCESS SHOULD
PLAY OUT THROUGH THE PROCESS.
BUT REALLY JUST TRYING TO
UNDERSCORE THE NEED TO CREATE
THOSE LINKAGES ON EITHER SIDE
OF THE OR THROUGH THE FREEWAY
INTERCHANGES OR UNDERPASSES AND
OVERPASSES AND OTHERS WANT TO
SPEAK TO THAT AS WELL.
BUT THAT'S KIND OF WHERE OUR
HEADSPACE WITHOUT OF THIS LET
ME STOP SHARING SCREEN MIGHT BE
EASIER FOR FOLKS TO I CAN PULL
IT BACK UP IF YOU'D LIKE BUT
FOR NOW THE CONVERSATION IS
PROBABLY EASIER TO SEE EACH
OTHER'S FACES.
WE GO ALL RIGHT, DHARMA, THE
WAY I READ THE RESOLUTION I
DON'T SEE THESE THINGS AT ODDS
AT ALL.
I MEAN AS A SIDEBAR I WISH WE
WOULD CONSIDER DEDICATING ONE
OF THOSE LANES TO BUS RAPID
TRANSIT ONE OF THE EXISTING
LINES.
BUT I THINK THIS IS REALLY
ABOUT AND I ACTUALLY TOOK THIS
ROUTE RECENTLY IF YOU GO DOWN
WASHTENAW TOWARDS LIKE WHERE
THE SHERIFF'S OFFICE YOU HAVE
TO CUT ACROSS AN AREA WHERE
PEOPLE ARE YOU KNOW, IT'S AN
ONRAMP TO A FREEWAY.
SO I THINK WHAT YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT, RAYMOND, IF YOU COULD
CONFIRM IS ABOUT HAVING A
BETTER WAY THAN LIKE A DESIRE
LINE.
LET'S JUST GOING INTO SOME
GRASS ON TO A SKETCHY SIDEWALK
WITH A BUNCH OF HIGH SPEED
TRAFFIC SO I DON'T FEEL THIS
REALLY TAKES AWAY FROM TRANSIT
AT ALL RIGHT.
YEAH, I THINK THAT'S CONSISTENT
WITH AGAIN WHERE WE WERE
THINKING AT THE ONE INTERCHANGE
THAT HAS SOME ACCOMMODATION IS
WASHINGTON BUT ADMITTEDLY IT'S
PROBABLY SUBPAR TO PUT IT
MILDLY AND IF YOU RECENTLY BITE
THROUGH IT YOU CAN ATTEST
BETTER THAN ANYONE.
>> SO YEAH, I THINK THE IDEA IS
TO REALLY IF WE'RE TRYING TO BE
MULTIMODAL AGAIN TRANSIT
ACCOMMODATIONS AS WELL AS MY
ACCOMMODATIONS
, CAN YOU STILL
HAND UP THEY HAVE ANOTHER COME
OUT?
>> NOPE.
SORRY ABOUT THAT.
NO I'M GOOD.
AND THIS
I WAS KIND
OF WONDERING RAYMOND, IF
THERE'S ANYTHING SPECIFIC OR
MORE SPECIFICS THAT ARE
INTENDED BY THE SECOND RESULT
CLAUSE WHICH REQUESTS THAT
REEVALUATE THE RESOURCES NEEDED
TO REBUILD I GUESS WHAT ARE YOU
GETTING AT WITH THAT?
YEAH, A COMMON MESSAGE.
>> I WANTED TO USE A DIFFERENT
WORD BUT A COMMON MESSAGE WE
HEAR FROM DOD IS THAT THEY
DON'T PROGRAM SOME OF THESE
IMPROVEMENTS AS PART OF THE
PROJECT AND WE'LL USE KIND
OF THE THE BUDGET AS SORT OF A
RATIONALE MANY OF YOU MAY
RECALL FROM A COUPLE OF YEARS
AGO NORTH MAIN STREET WHICH HAS
BEEN KIND OF TABLED FOR WE
DON'T KNOW HOW BUT NOT THAT
THEY ARE ONLY RESURFACING FROM
CURB TO CURB AND IF THE CITY
WANTS ANY BIKE PAD
ACCOMMODATIONS OR ANY OTHER
IMPROVEMENTS WOULD BE ON THE
CITY'S DIME.
WE'VE HEARD A SIMILAR SORT
OF BEGINNING DISCUSSION IN THAT
SAME VEIN TO SAY WE'RE NOT
OPPOSED TO IT BUT IF YOU WANT
IT YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE TO PAY
FOR IT.
AND IF YOU THINK ABOUT WHAT IT
WOULD TAKE FOR THE CITY TO TRY
TO MUSTER THE RESOURCES TO DO A
BRIDGE PROJECT OR SOMETHING
LIKE THAT THAT'S NOT EVEN OURS
UNDER OUR CONTROL, THAT IS
MAYBE NOT A REASONABLE REQUEST
.
WE RAN INTO THE SAME THING ON
THE LIBERTY BRIDGE THAT WAS
HIT.
WE SENT A LETTER ASKING FOR
BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN
ACCOMMODATIONS.
THEY SAID THERE'S NO BUDGET FOR
IT.
THEY EVEN DID THE SAME THING TO
US ON JACKSON CROSSWALKS.
THEY SAID WE'RE NOT OPPOSED TO
IT BUT WE'RE NOT GOING TO PAY
FOR IT.
SO THERE'S BEEN A SORT
OF HISTORY OF THIS POSITIONING
TO SAY WE'RE ONLY FOCUSING
ALLOCATING RESOURCES FOR
AUTOMOBILE MOVEMENTS AND
ANYTHING BEYOND.
SO THIS IS JUST A LONG WINDED
WAY OF SAYING THAT MORE THAN
JUST GIVING IT LIP SERVICE.
IT SHOULD ACTUALLY BE PART
OF THE PROJECT AND THEREFORE
RESOURCES DEDICATED TO THE
PROJECT SHOULD REFLECT THAT AS
WELL.
I REALLY APPRECIATE THE
EXPLANATION AND SINCE THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT WE WOULD BE
RECOMMENDING TO CITY COUNCIL, I
WOULD RECOMMEND THAT WHEN CITY
COUNCIL IF WHEN THE CITY
COUNCIL TAKES US UP THAT MAYBE
THEY'RE A LITTLE BIT MORE
EXPLICIT AND GIVE MORE CONCRETE
DIRECTION ABOUT WHAT WE REALLY
WANT WITH THAT STATEMENT.
SO BUT I AGREE I THANK FOR THE
EXPLANATION PETER, I THINK IT'S
WORTH NOTING MORE CAR TRAFFIC
VOLUME THROUGH THESE
INTERCHANGES WILL MAKE IT EVEN
MORE DIFFICULT AND MORE
EXPENSIVE FOR US TO FUND
SAFE
WAYS TO GET AND I THINK IT'S
WE'RE HATED IT LOOKS LIKE YOUR
VIDEO AND AUDIO ARE OUR YEAH.
AND THERE'S A WAY TO GET A
BETTER SIGNAL MAYBE MAYBE TRY
AGAIN GO BACK A FEW SECONDS
THAT AUDIO ONLY LET'S GIVE THIS
A TRY THEN THAT OUGHT TO BE A
IT'S NOT GREAT.
YEAH MAYBE TRY RECONNECTING AS
WELL MAYBE WE'LL TRY WE'RE
CONNECTING.
ALL RIGHT I'LL BE BACK IN A
MINUTE OK AS YOU WOULD EXPECT
THE AUDIO IS PERFECT.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS WHILE WE
WAIT FOR PETER
?
POINT OF CLARIFICATION, RAYMOND
JUST WHILE WE IF ONE OF THE
CROSSINGS IS AN UNDERPASS DOES
THE CITY DOES OWN THE ROAD LIKE
FOR EXAMPLE PACARD BUT NOT THE
BRIDGE STRUCTURES, THE COLUMNS
AND STUFF THOSE ARE DEFINED BY
DOT BUT THE ACTUAL SURFACE, THE
ROAD THE CITIZENS OF YOUR MUTED
.
>> YES, THAT'S
CORRECT.
>> THANK YOU FOR THAT
CLARIFICATION.
OK, BUT AS YOU CAN PROBABLY
SURMISE TO A LOT OF TIMES
SUPERSTRUCTURES AND SUPPORT
STRUCTURES AND THINGS THAT
CONFINE AND PINCH THE ABILITY
TO MAKE OTHER IMPROVEMENTS
THERE I GO BACK TO PETER REAL
QUICK SALESGIRLS SORRY FOR THE
TECHNICAL CHALLENGE.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
CAN YOU GET MAYBE NOT FROZEN
AGAIN?
YEAH.
LOOKS LIKE A FROZEN LAPTOP.
OK, I WAS GOING TO SAY OK LET'S
GO DEMO REAL QUICK WHILE WE
WAIT FOR PETER TO RESOLVE THE
TECHNICAL DIFFICULTIES I JUST
WANTED TO EXPRESS MY GRATITUDE
FOR STAFF TAKING THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO IMBUE THIS
PROJECT.
IT'S NOT OURS WITH OUR VALUES
SO THANK YOU FOR BRINGING THIS
FORWARD.
ABSOLUTELY.
PETER, MAYBE IF YOU'VE CUT
VIDEO MAYBE IT'S BETTER
HOPEFULLY CAN YOU HEAR ME OK?
GREAT DHARMA YES.
WELL I LIKE WHAT YOU JUST SAID.
>> I'D ALSO LIKE THAT MORE CAR
TRAFFIC VOLUME AT THESE
INTERCHANGES IS GOING TO MAKE
IT MORE DIFFICULT TO HAVE SAFE
NON MOTORIZED ROUTES THROUGH
THERE.
SO I THINK IT IS WORTH
MENTIONING THAT WE'RE NOT IN
FAVOR OF THINGS LIKE NEW LANES
ON US TWENTY THREE THAT WILL
INCREASE VOLUME.
I THOUGHT THAT WAS A REALLY
GOOD COMMENT THAT WE HEARD
EARLIER IN THE IN THE MEETING.
SO I THINK THAT WOULD BE AN
APPROPRIATE THING TO ADD TO
THIS RESOLUTION
.
SO IT SOUNDS LIKE THERE IS SOME
INTEREST IN AMENDMENT TO ADD A
RESOLVED CLAUSE.
IS THAT A MOTION TO REJECT A
MOTION THAT OR YEAH.
YEAH.
DO I NEED TO HAVE SOME SIMPLE
LANGUAGE IN MIND OR DO I NEED
TO PROPOSE SOME LANGUAGE BEFORE
I MAKE A MOTION?
>> WELL I SUPPOSE BUT ALSO IS
THERE AN IMPLICATION TO COUNCIL
WHO WOULD BE RECEIVING THIS
THAT THAT IS AN INTENT OR WE
PROBABLY NEED TO SPELL IT OUT
AS WE SEND IT TO COUNCIL.
RIGHT.
RATHER THAN JUST COMMENTS IN
THE MEETING?
>> YEAH, I THINK IT SHOULD BE
AN AMENDMENT TO THE RESOLUTION
IF THAT'S WHAT THE BODY DESIRES
TO DO AND PETER, TO THE EXTENT
YOU FEEL COMFORTABLE CRAFTING
SOME LANGUAGE HERE ON THE FLY,
YOU'RE WELCOME TO DO THAT AS
LONG AS WE CAN GET IT MOST
OF THE WAY THERE, THEN WE CAN
ADD SOME PUNCTUATION TO BEFORE
WE GET THE RESOLUTION.
OK, SO I GUESS I WOULD SAY
RESOLVED THAT WELL IT SEEMS
LIKE WE MAY NEED A WHEREAS
CLAUSE IT SAYS THAT THAT EXTRA
VOLUME ON US TWENTY THREE WILL
MAKE MORE DIFFICULT TO TO
NAVIGATE THESE INTERCHANGES
WITH NONVOTER TRANSPORTATION
AND THEN A RESOLVED CLAUSE SAYS
THAT THE THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION IS NOT SERVE
.
WE COULD START OTHER LOSSES
WHICH IS RESOLVED THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCIL
RECOMMEND SOLUTION THAT
DISCOURAGES FROM ADDING LANES
ON THIS SECTION OF US TWENTY
THREE YEAH DISCOURAGES ADDING
LANES AND OTHER OTHER ACTIONS
THAT WILL INCREASE TRAFFIC
VOLUME ON THIS SECTION OF US.
>> TWENTY THREE.
OK SO THE AMENDMENT IF I GOT IT
WOULD READ SOMETHING LIKE OR
WOULD READ FROM THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS CITY COUNCIL PASSED
A RESOLUTION THAT DISCOURAGES
THEM FROM ADDING LANES OR TO
THE SECTION OF US TWENTY THREE
OR ANY OR MAKING ANY OTHER
ACTIONS THAT WOULD ENCOURAGE
INCREASED VOLUME ON THE SECTION
I JUST JUST TYPE SOMETHING UP
CAN I SHARE IT WITH YOU OR
SCREEN OR WHATEVER ON YOUR
SCREEN THAT MIGHT BE EASIER
THAN JUST EMAIL BUT I'LL TRY
EMUNAH THERE YOU GO.
>> RIGHT I WOULD SPECIFY THAT
IT SHOULD BE AUTO CENTRIC
VOLUME.
OBVIOUSLY WE WANT TO INCREASE
NON-MORAL BUT JUST SPECIFY AUTO
CENTRIC VOLUME US TWENTY TWO I
THINK THAT'S THE LAW ANYWAY
RIGHT.
I DON'T THINK IT'S LEGAL TO
RIDE A BIKE OR ANYTHING ON
THERE BUT HOW DO YOU MEAN LIKE
TRANSIT OR SOMETHING ELSE.
YEAH LIKE SINGLE OCCUPANCY
THAT'S SINGLE OCCUPANCY OK
CAN
YOU SEE MY CONSUMATE OK INSTEAD
OF SINGLE OCCUPANCY HOW ABOUT
PRIVATE VEHICLE TRAFFIC.
YEAH I THINK THAT'S GOOD.
IS THAT THE INTENT OF THIS
STUDY YOU'RE BASICALLY TO SAY
WE WANT TO REDUCE US TWENTY
THREE UTILIZATION OR TO HAVE
MORE EQUITABLE MODES.
I JUST WANT TO POINT OUT AND WE
SHOULD HAVE CLEAR LEGIBILITY ON
WHERE WE SHOULD HAVE THE
PARTICULAR TRAFFIC RELATIVE TO
WE DON'T WANT TO OBVIOUSLY
INCREASE RELIANCE BUT TO THE
EXTENT THAT WE WANT TO INCREASE
LEGIBILITY ON WHAT'S DESIGNATED
FOR CONNECTIVITY AND NON
MOTORIZED VERSUS MOTORIZED TO
ME I THINK THE SINGLE OCCUPANCY
VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED IS THE
REDUCTION KIND OF TARGET FOR TO
ZERO OR SO MOVING TOGETHER OR
ZERO CARBON NEUTRALITY.
SO I JUST I'M THROWING OUT
THERE I MEAN IS IT WE WANT ALL
CARS GONE FROM US.
TWENTY THREE I MEAN I DON'T
KNOW IF THAT'S NECESSARILY
GOAL.
>> RIGHT.
I GUESS I'M ASKING THAT WE
DISCOURAGE ACTIONS THAT WILL
INCREASE VOLUME ON THOSE TWENTY
OR OK AND I'M TRYING TO I GUESS
TO POINT OUT A SINGLE OCCUPANCY
VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED BY
PRIVATE VEHICLES I SUPPOSE I
GUESS IT'S NOT CLEAR TO ME THE
DISTINCTION THAT WE'RE MAKING
BETWEEN SINGLE OCCUPANCY
VEHICLE AND PRIVATE VEHICLE IS
WHAT AM I NOT GETTING HERE?
>> SO I'M CONCERNED IF WE IF WE
TALK ABOUT SINGLE OCCUPANCY AND
THEN THEY SAY OH, WE'LL JUST
MAKE IT AN H OF LANE AND THEY
STILL WIDEN THE ROAD AND THEY
ARE STILL PUTTING PRIVATE CARS
IN THOSE LANES.
THAT TO ME IS SOMETHING WE WANT
TO DISCOURAGE TRANSIT
OF VARIOUS FLAVORS WHICH MAY OR
MAY NOT ALWAYS BE BUSSES.
I THINK WE DO WANT TO ENCOURAGE
IT'S ABOUT MOVING PEOPLE AND
MOVING PEOPLE, NOT CARS LIKE
THAT.
THAT'S WHY I'M MAKING THAT
DISTINCTION.
THANK YOU THAT THAT MAKES SENSE
TO ME.
I APPRECIATE THE SO PETER'S THE
ONE THAT'S MOVING US IN.
ARE YOU HAPPY WITH SORTING
BEFORE YOU SEEK A SECOND OR
DOES ANYONE ELSE DO ON TO OTHER
PEOPLE CAN AMEND YOUR AMENDMENT
I SUPPOSE BUT YEAH I'D LIKE TO
MOVE THAT I'D LIKE TO MOVE THAT
WE ADD THIS AMENDMENT THIS
ADDITIONAL RESOLVE CLAUSE AS
SHOWN ON THE SCREEN OK BUT
SECONDED BY JULIE ANY MORE
DISCUSSION ON THE AMENDMENTS
.
OK, JULIE.
YEAH I JUST WONDERED IF IF THIS
SECTION CLEAR ENOUGH OR SHOULD
NOT BE DISAMBIGUATE IT MAYBE
THAT CAN BE DONE AT
YEAH THAT
CAN BE CLEARED UP YOU KNOW WHEN
IT GOES TO CITY COUNCIL NONE
OF THE OTHER RESULT CLAUSES
CLAUSES ARE EXPLICIT ABOUT
WHICH SECTIONS OF US TWENTY
THEY JUST SAY US TWENTY THREE.
SO I ASSUME THAT THAT COULD BE
PART OF THAT PROCESS.
>> DHARMA I WAS JUST GOING TO
SAY WHAT'S BEING TYPED THE
PROJECT AREA BECAUSE THIS IS A
SPECIFIC PROJECT
SO DO WE I
GUESS DO WE CHANGE IT NOW
BEFORE WE VOTE ON IT?
I'M OK I'M OK ADDING THAT I
THINK THAT'S A GOOD CHANGE.
YEAH I THINK IT'S FINE TO JUST
IF YOU'RE HAPPY TO CHANGE IT.
>> YEAH
.
AND YOU KNOW RAIMUNDA THERE
NEEDS TO BE A NEW WORDSMITH YOU
KNOW FEEL FREE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS ON THE
AMENDMENT THEN LET'S VOTE ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE AMENDMENT
AS SHOWN ON THE SCREEN.
PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR
HAND.
>> YES.
I'M SORRY TO INTERRUPT YOU REAL
QUICKLY.
I JUST ON A ARE WE VOTING IS
THE VOTE IS RIGHT NOW ON THE
AMENDMENT IS OK AND THEN I'M
SORRY WHO WAS THE SECOND ON.
>> I MISSED IT.
OH I OH YES SORRY WAS THERE A
SECOND I THINK I SECOND IT BUT
I THINK THEN YOU SAID JULIE
YEAH YEAH I JUST I WAS TRYING
TO CAPTURE WHAT SHE WROTE SO I
MISSED IT SO SO WHO IS YOUR
MINISTER BALLENTINE MOLLY
SECOND TO THE
THANK YOU SORRY
IT SURE LOOKS LIKE SO AGAIN
THAT WE COULD HAVE YES.
OUR HANDS RAISED FOR THOSE IN
FAVOR OF THE AMENDMENT AS A YES
OR NO.
>> YES.
RIGHT.
THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE RAISE YOUR
HAND SAY NO.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE AMENDMENT IS APPROVED AS
SHOWN.
SO RAYMOND FOR STAFF YOU HAD
THIS AT SOME POINT YOU NEED TO
SEND YOU GOT A SCREENSHOT OR
SOMETHING AND YOU WANT TO DO
IT.
>> I THINK I TYPED IT UP.
>> THANK YOU LONG ENOUGH THAT I
WAS ABLE TO GRAB IT SO BACK TO
ANY OTHER DISCUSSION ON THE
ORIGINAL RESOLUTION, THE
ORIGINAL MOTION.
>> OK, YEAH AND IT DOESN'T HAVE
TO BE AMENDMENT RIGHT NOW BUT
IT BE WHEREAS IF IT'S THE THIRD
ONE THE LAND ADJACENT TO US
TWENTY THREE IS DEVELOPED
ACROSS DECADES WITH THE DENSE
MIX OF RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL
PROFESSIONAL RECREATIONAL
PURPOSES.
MAYBE CONSIDER SOMETHING TO THE
EFFECT THAT THE FUTURE ZONING
DESIGNATION PLIMOTH WASHTENAW
TO BE TSAY ONE SO WE ARE GOING
TO SEE ADDITIONAL INCREASED
DENSITY OF THAT THAT'S AT LEAST
THOUGHT ANYWAYS WE PODS ON
GREEN ROAD AND I THINK LAST
NIGHT I TALKED ABOUT ADDING
ADDITIONAL DENSITY SO NOT NOT A
PARTICULAR CHANGE BUT SOMETHING
TO RECOGNIZE THAT EVEN THE LAND
USE PATTERNS OF OUR ZONING IS
PUSHING TOWARDS ADDITIONAL
DENSITY PARTICULARLY ON THE
PLYMOUTH AND WASHTENAW CORRIDOR
.
>> SO SO I JUST JUST MENTIONING
THAT AS A POTENTIAL WHEREAS AS
YOU GUYS WORK ON THAT LIKE AS
YOU GUYS CLAIM THIS UP THERE IS
A CERTAIN LEVEL OF LAND USE
POLICIES THAT WILL INCREASE
DENSITY TO JUST JUST MAKING
THAT SO THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU DARMA AND RAYMOND,
I'M ASSUMING YOU PROBABLY HAVE
MORE RECENT INFORMATION THAN
THIS BUT I'M JUST LOOKING AT
THE PROJECT PAGE FROM NOT FOR
THIS AND IT ACTUALLY SAYS THAT
ONE OF THE GOALS OF THE PROJECT
IS TO A OPERATION FOR USERS
ALONG IN CROSSING THE CORRIDOR
AND IT ACTUALLY TALKS ABOUT KEY
CROSSINGS.
SO I DON'T KNOW I JUST THOUGHT
I'M NOT SURE IF YOU KNOW, I'M
HAPPY TO TAKE THAT TO
COUNCILOR'S JUST LIKE A
WAREHOUSE CLUBS BUT IT SEEMS
LIKE EVEN THEY WERE ADMITTING
BUT THAT WAS PART OF THE ISSUES
THAT THEY WERE TRYING TO
ADDRESS UNLESS YOU'VE HEARD
DIFFERENTLY SINCE.
>> YEAH, NO, I THINK IT'S
SOMETIMES I THINK YOU'RE YOU'RE
RIGHT.
BUT WE'RE NOT SEEING A LOT
OF EVIDENCE THAT THEY'RE
CONSIDERING ALL MODES.
SO THAT'S WHY WE FELT LIKE IT
JUST BASED ON A FEW MEETINGS
WE'VE BEEN TO THAT THERE SEEM
TO BE A NEED TO UNDERSCORE THE
NON MILITARIZED ELEMENT
ALTHOUGH THERE DEFINITELY WAS I
JUST WONDERED IF IT WAS WORTH
SAYING WHEREAS AMDE SAYS THAT
ONE OF THE KEY ISSUES IS
NON-MORAL CONNECTIONS ACROSS
THE US.
TWENTY THREE THAT'S ALL YOU
KNOW I MEAN THEY ARE SAYING
THAT USE THEIR OWN WORDS
IF YOU
WANT TO AMEND THIS TO ADD ANY
WHEREAS CLAUSES WE CAN DO THAT
OR TAKE THAT WITH YOU AS
SOMETHING IS DRAFTED TO GO TO
CITY COUNCIL.
I THINK THE WAREHOUSE WAS
UNCOMFORTABLE DOING THAT
WAITING WAITING UNTIL THE CITY
COUNCIL OR I MEAN WHEREAS
CLAUSES DON'T REALLY CHANGE BUT
THAT RESOLVED CLASSES.
BUT ANY OTHER DISCUSSION ON THE
THE RESOLUTION AS AMENDED.
ALL RIGHT.
IS A MOTION TO RECOMMEND
APPROVAL OF THE RESTORE
RESOLUTION TO RESTORE COMMUNITY
CONNECTIONS WITH CONTINUOUS
COMFORTABLE WALKING AND
FACILITIES ACROSS THE US.
TWENTY THREE THERE ARE MOTION
TO RECOMMEND ARE DULY SECONDED
BY MAKING ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
OF THE AMENDED MOTION.
>> PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR
HAND.
>> YEAH AND ALL THOSE OPPOSED
PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE YOUR
HAND TO GET YOUR HAND RAISED
FOR THE YES I'M ASSUMING RIGHT
.
I THINK IT'S OK.
SO THE MOTION MOTION PASSES AS
AMENDED.
THANK YOU FOR THAT.
>> OK ALL RIGHT NEXT
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
BYLAWS AMENDMENT OUR BYLAWS
CALL FOR AN ANNUAL REVIEW TO
SEE IF CHANGES ARE DESIRED
NEEDED.
THIS WILL BE AN OPEN DISCUSSION
MODERATED BY RAYMONDE TO SEE IF
THE COMMISSION HAS ANY CHANGES
MIND THAT WE'D LIKE TO CONSIDER
.
ALL RIGHT.
SO ONE LITTLE SIDEBAR.
THANK YOU TO THE AMA AND THE
CITY COUNCIL.
>> THEY DID APPROVE THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION BYLAW
AMENDMENT A YEAR AGO ACTUALLY
ALMOST TO THE DAY AGAIN MEA
CULPA.
I APOLOGIZE IT TOOK SO LONG TO
GET OUT IN FRONT OF COUNCIL.
>> BUT THE ORIGINAL AMENDMENT
AS PROPOSED BY TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSIONS, THERE WERE NO
CHANGES AS I UNDERSTAND THERE'S
THIS DISCUSSION ABOUT WHETHER
THERE SHOULD BE AN AGE
REQUIREMENT FOR ONE OF THE
SEATS THAT IS NOT WAS VOTED
UPON LAST TWO NIGHTS AGO.
SO AS IT STANDS NOW, THERE ARE
SEVEN MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC IN
ADDITION TO THE REPRESENTATION
FROM SOME OF THE OTHER LIKE
PLANNING COMMISSION NO
TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY AND
THE COMMISSION ON DISABILITY
ISSUES.
SO ANYWAY, THAT WAS JUST A
LITTLE SIDEBAR I WANTED TO LET
YOU KNOW ABOUT.
BUT FOR THIS WHAT I WANTED TO
JUST MENTION IN SOME OF THIS IS
IN YOUR HOMEWORK BUT IF YOU HAD
THE CHANCE TO SCAN THE BYLAWS
YOU MAY HAVE COME ACROSS
ARTICLE ELEVEN POINT TO WHICH
STATES THAT THESE BYLAWS SHALL
BE REVIEWED BY THE COMMISSION
FOR POSSIBLE AMENDMENT AT LEAST
ONCE ANNUALLY.
SO WHAT WE WANTED TO DO IS JUST
BRING IT IN FRONT OF THE
COMMISSION TO SEE IF THERE ARE
ANY SUGGESTED CHANGES OVER THE
COURSE OF THE PAST YEAR I
HAVEN'T HEARD OF THE COMMISSION
FIRST SAYING THAT'S NOT TO SAY
THAT MAYBE YOU AREN'T SUING ON
SOMETHING BUT WHEN THE ONE THAT
CAME UP LAST YEAR WAS A
CONVERSATION I THINK WE WERE
HAVING WITH MOLLY FOR A WHILE
BECAUSE YOU'RE HAVING
DIFFICULTY FILLING SEE I
HAVEN'T HEARD ANY SUCH CALLS
FOR ANY OTHER CHANGES BUT
REALLY WHAT I WANTED TO DO IS
JUST HEAR FROM YOU ALL TO SEE
IF YOU FEEL THERE ANY CHANGES.
I HAVE THE BYLAWS READY.
I CAN SHOW THEM WE CAN WALK
THROUGH THEM REAL QUICKLY IF
THAT'S A GOOD USE OF TIME.
BUT IF YOU FEEL LIKE LEAVING
GOOD ENOUGH ALONG LEAVING OR IF
YOU THINK THAT YOU'RE GOOD
ENOUGH AND BE LEFT ALONE FOR
NOW, THAT'S FINE.
SO IT'S REALLY JUST AT YOUR
DISCRETION IN TERMS OF HOW YOU
WANT TO HAVE THE CONVERSATION
IF YOU THINK THERE ARE ANY
CHANGES THAT ARE NEEDED, ANY
COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS ON OUR
ANNUAL REVIEW OR BYLAWS
DHARMA
?
>> YES, WE WAITING TO SEE IF
ANYONE ELSE WOULD I MEAN WE DID
HAVE A DISCUSSION LAST TIME
WHEN WE CONSIDERED THE SEAT FOR
FIFTY FIVE AND UP WHETHER WE
SHOULD MORE EXPLICITLY ADDRESS
THE COMMITMENT TO DIVERSIFYING
OUR SEATS.
AND YOU KNOW, I THINK DIVERSITY
CAN BE ACCOMPLISHED A NUMBER
OF WAYS.
I'M NOT SUGGESTING THAT WE
RESERVED SEATS FOR A PARTICULAR
PEOPLE NECESSARILY BUT I THINK
I SHARE THE BYLAWS WHERE THEY
MENTIONED WANTING TO HAVE
DIVERSITY ACROSS A RANGE
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE AFFECTED BY
THE CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM.
IT JUST MADE ME WONDER IF WE
SHOULD CONSIDER THAT BECAUSE I
THINK WE HAVE THIS EQUITY
REPORT FROM THE EQUITABLE
ENGAGEMENT COMMITTEE THAT TALKS
ABOUT THE OVERREPRESENTATION IN
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS BY
PREDOMINANTLY OLDER WHITE
HOMEOWNERS AND I THINK IT'S
ALWAYS WORTH SEEKING MORE
DIVERSE VIEWPOINTS ON ALL
OF OUR COMMISSIONERS.
SO YES, MOLLY, SO THIS IS THIS
IS A CONVERSATION THAT I FEEL
LIKE I WAS INVOLVED IN GOING
BACK TO.
I'M LINDA.
DIANNE WAS STILL CHAIR OF THE
COMMISSION AND I BELIEVE VERY
STRONGLY THAT WE NEED A
CONCERTED EFFORT TO IMPROVE
REPRESENTATION ACROSS ALL THE
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS IN THE
CITY.
BUT I HAVE BEEN INCREASINGLY
CONVINCED THAT THAT ACTION HAS
TO COME FROM CITY COUNCIL AND
THAT IT CAN REALLY BE EFFECTIVE
COMING FROM ONE COMMISSION AT A
TIME.
THE MAYOR NOMINATES
COMMISSIONERS AND THE COUNCIL
GIVES THEM AND I THINK THAT
THERE ARE PROBABLY THINGS THAT
THE CITY COULD BE DOING TO SET
A COMMITMENT TO INCREASE
DIVERSITY AND IMPROVED
REPRESENTATION ACROSS ALL
OF THE COMMISSION'S.
MY IMPRESSION WAS THAT THERE
WAS WE WERE SORT OF WAITING
BECAUSE THERE WAS GOING TO BE
LIKE A DEA OFFICER HIRED IN THE
CITY AND ABOUT THIS WOULD THE
KIND OF THING THAT WOULD MAKE
SENSE FOR THAT PERSON TO
INITIATE.
AND SO I WOULD BE COMFORTABLE
HAVING A RESOLUTION THAT'S LIKE
CITY COUNCIL PLEASE HELP US DO
THIS.
BUT I'M I'M INCREASINGLY
CONVINCED THAT IT'S NOT GOING
TO BE AS EFFECTIVE IF WE TRY TO
DO IT OURSELVES AS THE
COMMISSION.
>> THANK YOU, JULIE.
I SECOND
EVERYTHING THAT MOLLY
SAID I THINK LIKE THE
APPLICATION DOESN'T GIVE US THE
RIGHT INFORMATION AND IT'S THE
SAME APPLICATION I THINK FOR
ALL THE COMMISSIONS.
SO I THINK SOMETHING HAS TO BE
DONE MORE INSTITUTIONAL LEVEL
AND I DO THINK IT'S SUPER
IMPORTANT SO A CITY COUNCIL.
YEAH, I HEARD THAT ANY OTHER
COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS
?
>> OK, OH IF DERMO JUST WANT TO
SAY I APPRECIATE FEEDBACK.
THANK YOU
.
ALL RIGHT SO THAT'S SO WE HAVE
THAT MESSAGE SENT TO DARMA.
IS THERE ANY OTHER DESIRE TO
SPEAK ON OUR BYLAWS FOR OUR
ANNUAL REVIEW FOR REMOVAL IF
NOT THEN.
Q THAT OBVIOUSLY IF YOU HAVE
ANY IDEAS OR SUGGESTIONS OR
BYLAWS CHANGES AT ANY POINT
TALK TO RAYMONT OR MEGGAN
MYSELF.
WE CAN ALWAYS INITIATE A
CHANGE.
THIS IS JUST A MANDATED ANNUAL
REVIEW SO THAT IS ALWAYS OPEN
FOR DISCUSSION.
>> I JUST TO CLARIFY SINCE I'M
NOT HEARING ANY NAME THEN WE
DON'T NEED TO BRING THIS ISSUE
BACK AT THIS TIME UNLESS A
COMMISSION MEMBER HAS SOMETHING
SPECIFIC TO DISCUSS.
I JUST WANT TO THANK THE OH OK.
>> SO DO WE NEED TO HAVE A
MOTION THEN INDICATING THAT NO
CHANGES ARE SUGGESTED WE CAN
MOVE OUT OF CONSENSUS ON WHAT I
JUST STATED.
>> I DON'T NEED A MOTION TO NOT
DO ANYTHING.
>> OK, ALL RIGHT.
NEXT ORDER OF BUSINESS
GREENVIEW TRAFICON GREENVIEW
BETWEEN FROM JACKSON TO DEXTER
THE PETITION PROCESS FOR THE
GREENVIEW TRAFFIC CALMING IS
NOW COMPLETE AND BEFORE US FOR
OUR RECOMMENDATION.
>> SO RAYMOND, IF YOU COULD
REVIEW THE PROJECT AND ANSWER
YOUR QUESTIONS.
YES, THANK YOU.
GO AHEAD SCREEN AGAIN
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO WE RECEIVED A PETITION FOR
TRAFFIC COMING IN GRANDVIEW
BETWEEN JACKSON AND DEXTER AND
AS IS PAR FOR THE COURSE AFTER
A SERIES OF MEETINGS WITH A
NEIGHBOR, THE NEIGHBORHOOD THE
FINAL CONCEPT PROPOSES TO SEE
HOUSE.
THIS CONCEPT WAS SUPPORTED BY
NINETY ONE PERCENT OF THE
RESPONDENTS TO THE FINAL POLL
WHICH BRINGS IT BEFORE YOU
TODAY.
AND THEN WE'RE SEEKING A
RECOMMENDATION FOR TAKING IT TO
CITY COUNCIL FOR THEIR APPROVAL
ON WE ESTIMATE THE COST TO BE
AROUND THIRTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS WHICH IS CONSISTENT
WITH ANOTHER PROJECT.
WE DID A SIMILAR MAGNITUDE AND
THE ONE THING I DID CLARIFY IN
TERMS OF PROCESS AND ZARTMAN I
WAS CHANGING SOME EMAILS ON
MONDAY ABOUT THE TRAFFIC
CONGRESO POLLUTION PASSED
EARLIER THIS MONTH AS I'M SURE
MANY OF YOU ARE AWARE AND I WAS
GOING TO REPORT ON LATER BUT
WHAT THE WAY WE'RE HANDLING
THESE PETITIONS THAT ARE PRETTY
FAR ALONG THE PROCESS ARE
ALREADY IN QUEUE.
WE'RE FOLLOWING THE EXISTING
PROGRAM PROCESS WHICH OVER
EXPECTATION AND KIND OF CLARITY
IN TERMS OF WHAT THOSE
PETITIONERS CAN EXPECT.
ANY NEW POSITIONS THAT COME
INTO THE PROCESS WILL FOLLOW
THE NEWER AS BY CITY COUNCIL.
SO I JUST WANTED FIRST OF ALL I
WILL ALSO MENTION THAT'S ONE
OF THE REASONS WHY YOU DON'T
HAVE THE DRAFT RESOLUTION HERE
BECAUSE WE WEREN'T QUITE SURE I
WAS WAITING FOR SOME
CLARIFICATION FROM LEGAL DARREN
.
I WAS ABLE TO KIND
OF SYNCHRONIZE ON THAT NOTE
THAT HELPED CLARIFY THAT WE
WILL GO AHEAD AND ADVANCE THIS
TO COUNCIL IF THIS RECEIVED
WELL ADVANCED COUNCIL
REGARDLESS BUT IT WILL REFLECT
YOUR RECOMMENDATION AS WELL.
>> SO WITH THAT ON HAPPY TO
ENTERTAIN ANY QUESTIONS THAT
YOU MIGHT HAVE.
THANK YOU RAYMOND.
ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS
SCRIMPY PROJECT.
>> OK
OK CAN I HAVE A MOTION
THEN TO RECOMMEND APPROVAL
OF THE BALDWIN TRAFFIC COMING
PROJECT BETWEEN PACARD AND
STADIUM APPROVED BY DERMO
SECONDED BY ONE TO ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF THE MOTION PLEASE SAY
YES OR RAISE YOUR YES OTHERS
POST THE MOTION PLEASE RAISE
YOUR HAND.
THE MOTION PASSES.
>> NEXT UP THE INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION SECTION FIRST TOPIC
IS THE SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
UPDATE STAFF CONTINUES TO
ADVANCE THE DEVELOPMENT AND
EVENTUAL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
SO WE HAVE SUZANNE FLOWERS HERE
THIS EVENING TO PROVIDE AN
UPDATE ON THIS INITIATIVE.
>> SO SHE'S A THANK YOU.
AND JUST FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO I
HAVE NOT MET, THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR HAVING ME THIS EVENING.
AND AGAIN, SUZANNE FLOWERS,
TRANSPORTATION PLANNER ON
RAMAN'S TEAM.
I'M JUST REALLY EXCITED TO BE
AT MY ONE OF MY FIRST
TRANSPORTATION MISSION MEETINGS
.
>> THANK YOU FOR COMING.
AND RAYMOND, CAN I GET A THUMBS
UP TO MAKE SURE YOU CAN SEE MY
SCREEN COMING THROUGH?
YEAH, EXCELLENT.
SO AS ALREADY NOTED, I'M GOING
TO PROVIDE A QUICK BRIEF UPDATE
ON SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND
THE FOUR MAIN AREAS I'LL BE
FOCUSING ON THIS EVENING OUR
BACKGROUND PROGRAM LAUNCH OUR
FOCUS GROUPS AND KIND OF WHAT
OUR NEXT STEPS ARE PLANNING TO
BE.
JUST AS A REMINDER THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM WAS
DEVELOPED AS PART OF THE
IMPLEMENTATION CONTRACT WITH
SAM SCHWARTZ.
THE PLAN WAS ADOPTED IN TWENTY
TWENTY ONE AND ONE OF THE KEY
BEHAVIORAL PROBLEMS THAT HAVE
BEEN REALLY BROUGHT FORWARD IS
SPEED.
AND SO THE TWO GRAPHICS THAT I
HAVE ON YOUR SCREEN THIS
EVENING FOUND WITHIN OUR PLAN
BUT IT REALLY TALKS TO THIS
ISSUE THAT WE HAVE WITH SPEED
AND HOW DANGEROUS IT CAN BE FOR
OUR MOST VULNERABLE ROAD USERS
THOSE BEING PEDESTRIANS AND
CYCLISTS.
SO WE CAN SEE THE GRAPHIC ON
THE LEFT IS A PRETTY WELL KNOWN
GRAPHIC THAT HIGHLIGHTS AT 20
MILES AN HOUR NINE AND A HALF
OUT OF TEN PEOPLE WHO ARE
WALKING OR BIKING TO SURVIVE A
CRASH AT THIRTY MILES PER HOUR.
WE SEE THAT CUT IN HALF TO
FIFTY PERCENT SURVIVING AND
THEN WE HAVE SPEEDS AT 40 MILES
PER HOUR AND ABOVE IT IS ONE
OUT OF TEN PEOPLE SURVIVING A
SERIOUS CRASH THAT IS VERY
TROUBLESOME FOR OUR COMMUNITY
AND KNOWING THAT WE HAVE BECOME
A VISION ZERO COMMUNITY WE
REALLY WANT TO ADDRESS THIS.
ADDITIONALLY, THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM HIGHLIGHTS
THE GRAPHIC ON YOUR RIGHT THAT
OUR MAJOR STREETS COMPRISE
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT OF OUR
TOTAL STREETS BUT THEY SEE
EIGHTY NINE PERCENT OF OUR
SEVERE AND FATAL TRAFFIC
CRASHES AND THAT'S VERY
CONCERNING.
>> SO THE SPEED MANAGEMENT TOOL
IS DONE AS I MENTIONED IN
CONSULTATION WITH OUR SAM
SCHWARTZ IMPLEMENTED TRACK
CONTRACT AND THE TOOL FOCUSES
ON HIGHLIGHTING ALL OF THE
ELIGIBLE ROADWAYS.
SO I WILL BE HAVING THIS IN
JUST A MINUTE.
BUT TO KIND OF GO THROUGH THE
TABS WE PROVIDE AN OVERVIEW
OF WHY WE HAVE THIS BIG
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
WHAT ARE THE SPECIFIC TOOLS
THAT ARE ELIGIBLE IN THIS
PROGRAM WHERE THE STREETS ARE
ELIGIBLE FOR THAT INPUT THAT WE
HAVE ASKED PEOPLE TO PROVIDE US
IN THE PAST AND ARE FREQUENTLY
ASKED QUESTIONS AND THE MAP I
JUST WANT TO TAKE A MOMENT TO
REVIEW THAT WE DO HAVE A HIGH,
MEDIUM AND LOW CATEGORIZATION
FOR ALL OF OUR MAJOR STREET AND
THIS WAS REALLY BASED ON A NEAT
SCORE ON THE SEVERITY
OF CRASHES AND WHETHER THEY
WERE IDENTIFIED AS A TIER ONE
OR TIER TWO ROADWAY AND THEN
THEY TOOK THE SUMMATION OF ALL
OF THOSE AND REALLY SPLIT THEM
INTO THIRDS BY MEDIUM AND LOW
BASED ON THAT SEVERITY AND I AM
GOING TO JUST WALK THROUGH THE
TOOL RATHER QUICKLY.
BUT AGAIN, THE GREAT THING WITH
THIS TOOL IS ANYONE CAN GO UP
TO THE TABS AT THE TOP AND SKIP
TO A PARTICULAR SECTION THEY
WANT OR SOMEONE CAN SCROLL
THROUGH THE SAME INFORMATION.
SO AGAIN IT PROVIDES BACKGROUND
ON WHY MAJOR STREETS ARE
IMPORTANT, WHY WE'RE FOCUSING
THIS PROGRAM ON THAT, HOW WE
CAME UP WITH THE DIFFERENT
TOOLS THAT ARE PRESENTED IN THE
TOOL BOX AND THE FOUR MAIN
TOOLS THAT WE HAVE ARE THIS
HORIZONTAL DEFLECTION THINGS
YOU DRIVE AROUND, YOU DRIVE ON
STINE'S IN STREET MARKETS AND
I'M NOT GOING TO GO THROUGH ALL
OF THE TOOLS BECAUSE I'M SURE
ALL OF YOU HAVE DONE YOUR
HOMEWORK PRIOR TO THIS
EVENING'S MEETING.
BUT THE ONE NEAT THING THAT WAS
BUILT BECAUSE THERE ARE LIKE
TWENTY TWO DIFFERENT TREATMENT
OPTIONS THAT CAN BE PROVIDED IF
YOU WANT TO JUMP TO DIFFERENT
TREATMENTS YOU CAN SCROLL OVER
ON THE VERY LEFT SIDE AND IT
WILL POP OUT FOR EXAMPLE LIKE
LANE REDUCTION SO YOU CAN CLICK
ON LANE REDUCTIONS, GET ALL
OF THE INFORMATION A BRIEF
DESCRIPTION THE TYPE OF CROSS
SECTION THIS COULD BE AN
EXAMPLE ROAD WHERE THIS MAY
HAVE ALREADY BEEN APPLIED UP
HERE CITY AND MORE INFORMATION.
I THINK THE BIGGEST PIECE THAT
I'D LIKE TO FOCUS ON FOR
ANOTHER MOMENT OR TWO AND THIS
MAY TAKE A MINUTE TO LOAD IS
REALLY THAT DISTRIBUTION
OF WHERE WE WANT TO SEE THESE
FACILITIES CHANGE IN ANN ARBOR
.
AND IF YOU SCROLL INTO THE MAP
YOU'RE ABLE TO CLICK ON ANY
OF THE STREETS THAT ARE PART
OF THE PROGRAM WHICH I AM DOING
RIGHT NOW.
FOR EXAMPLE, I'M CLICKING ON
FULLER ROAD AND IT PROVIDES FOR
ME SCROLL JUST A LITTLE THE
PARTICULAR SEGMENT THE
BEGINNING END POINTS THE
JURISDICTION THE PRIOR ZATION
SPEED LIMIT, THE POSTED SPEED
LIMIT NUMBER OF LANES AND ADT.
IT ALSO PROVIDES FOR THE
POTENTIAL SPEED MANAGEMENT
TOOLS IN THE PROVIDE YOUR INPUT
SECTION.
THIS IS THE AREA THAT WE HAVE
BEEN USING TO PUT INFORMATION
OUT TO THE PUBLIC REQUEST
PUBLIC INFORMATION AND THEN ALL
OF THE FEEDBACK THAT WE
RECEIVED WERE DEVELOPED INTO
OUR FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
AND SO I'M GOING TO GO BACK TO
MY SLIDE DECK
AND SO WHEN WE
LAUNCHED WHEN WE INITIALLY
LAUNCHED THE PROGRAM, WHAT WE
DID IS WE HAD THE STORY MAP
WHICH YOU JUST SAW AND THEN WE
ALSO PROVIDED AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR PEOPLE TO PROVIDE A VERY
HIGH LEVEL COMMENT ON THE
PROGRAM.
WE ASKED TWO SIMPLE QUESTIONS
WHAT QUESTIONS DO YOU HAVE
ABOUT THE PROGRAM AND WOULD YOU
LIKE TO SHARE COMMENTS?
LIKE I SAID, THOSE WERE USED TO
DEVELOP THE ENTIRETY OF OUR
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS AND
THERE ARE A MULTITUDE OF THOSE
QUESTIONS WITHIN THE TOOL
FOLLOWING THAT CONVERSATION.
WE REALLY THOUGHT A LITTLE BIT
MORE ABOUT GETTING THE PUBLIC
MORE ENGAGED WITHIN THE PROGRAM
DEVELOPMENT AND SO WE DECIDED
TO HAVE A SERIES OF FOCUS GROUP
DISCUSSIONS WHICH WAS HELD BY
SMITH GROUP.
SO STAFF WERE NOT DIRECTLY
INVOLVED WITH THAT BECAUSE WE
REALLY WANTED TO HAVE AN
UNBIASED OPINION IN THE KIND
OF GROUP INTERVIEWS AND SO WE
MAILED OUT A THOUSAND POSTCARDS
TO RANDOMLY SELECTED ADDRESSES
ACROSS THE CITY AND WE REALLY
WERE CLEAR ON KIND OF THE FOCUS
GROUP PURPOSE.
SO THE PURPOSES WERE REALLY ON
GETTING FEEDBACK ON THE TOOLS,
THE SPECIFIC INFORMATION, HOW
THE PROGRAM WILL WORK OR HOW WE
ENVISION THE PROGRAM TO WORK AT
THIS TIME.
WE WANTED PEOPLE TO TEST THE
ENDORSEMENT TOOL AND THEN LOOK
AT GENERALLY HOW THEY CAN STAY
ENGAGED WITH THE PROGRAM.
>> SO FOLLOWING THOSE FOCUS
GROUPS WE DID LIKE I SAID A
THOUSAND POSTCARD MAILINGS AND
THEN WE ALSO REACHED OUT TO
ABOUT 15 TARGETED STAKEHOLDERS
.
MANY OF YOU MAY HAVE BEEN
REACHED OUT TO BY ME TO
PURCHASE PAY IN THOSE GROUP
INTERVIEWS AND SO I WILL JUST
TAKE A MOMENT TO REVIEW SOME
OF THE HIGHLIGHTS FROM WHAT WE
HEARD ONE OF THOSE ITEMS BEING
WE REALLY WANT TO BE MORE
DELIBERATE OR THE PUBLIC WOULD
REALLY LIKE US TO BE MORE
DELIBERATE ON WHAT WE MEAN BY
SPEED LIMITS AND SPEED
REDUCTION.
AND SO THEY REALLY LOOKED FOR
US TO DECIDE IS IT THE POSTED
SPEED OR DO WE REALLY WANT THE
TRAVELING SPEED OVERALL FOR
PEOPLE TO JUST GO SLOWER?
SO WE REALLY WANT TO BE MORE
CLEAR ON OUR STORY MAP AND AN
INFORMATION THAT WE PRESENT TO
THE PUBLIC.
THEY ALSO REALLY WANTED TO SEE
SOME PROJECTS THAT HAD BEEN
RECENTLY COMPLETED THAT WERE
TIED INTO THE HIGH, MEDIUM AND
LOW SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
AREA.
THE ENDORSEMENT TOOL THEY
WANTED TO HAVE MORE QUESTIONS
ON PEOPLE'S CURRENT LIST
OF CONCERNS THAT THEY HAVE
ALONG CORRIDORS AND TO PROVIDE
MORE OPPORTUNITY FOR THEM TO
SAY TODAY'S CONDITIONS X AND
WE'D LIKE IT TO BE MORE
WALKABLE, MORE TRANSIT
FRIENDLY.
THERE WAS A LITTLE BIT MORE
FEEDBACK ON THE ENDORSEMENT
MAP.
THEY WANTED TO HAVE A LITTLE
BIT MORE TECHNICAL INFORMATION
RELATED TO HOW THESE TOOLS WERE
BEING USED.
CLEAR STATEMENT ABOUT HOW INPUT
AND ENDORSEMENTS ARE ALSO TO BE
USED AT A TRACK OR SHOWING WHAT
HAS BEEN DONE ON THE PRIORITY
STREETS IDENTIFYING THE PURPOSE
OF THE PROGRAM MORE CLEARLY AND
TO FIND ADDITIONAL EDUCATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES TO INFORM PEOPLE
ESPECIALLY DRIVERS ON MOMENT.
WELL, TAKING ALL OF THAT
FEEDBACK, WE'VE REALLY PUT SOME
ADDITIONAL THOUGHT INTO HOW WE
WANT TO ROLL OUT LIKE THE FIRST
OFFICIAL PHASE OF THIS PROGRAM
AND SO WE'RE CALLING THIS OUR
SPEED MANAGEMENT 1.0 AND I
THINK THE ONE THING TO NOTE IS
THAT WE ARE REALLY LOOKING TO
UTILIZE THE SAFE STREETS FOR
ALL GRANT FUNDING THAT WE WERE
RECENTLY AWARDED TO TO GET THIS
PROGRAM UP RUNNING.
WE'RE GOING TO FOCUS THOSE
LOCATIONS ON OUR HIGH, MEDIUM
AND LOW CORRIDORS.
AS MANY AS WE CAN.
BUT WE ALSO WANT TO LOOK AT
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION.
WE DON'T WANT TO HAVE
EVERYTHING ON THE WEST SIDE
NORTH SIDE, SOUTH SIDE.
WE REALLY WANT TO SEE A MUCH
MORE BLEND ACROSS THE CITY.
WE'RE GOING TO LOOK AT THE THEY
WILL BE TEMPORARY DEVICES SO
THAT WE CAN ACTUALLY COLLECT
DATA BEFORE AND AFTER TO REALLY
SEE THE EFFECTIVENESS WE WILL
BE LOOKING AT USING SPEED DATA
AND FRESH DATA TO EVALUATE THE
EFFECTIVENESS OF THOSE
TREATMENTS.
AND I HAVE NOTED IN THE STORY
THAT TOOL WE DO HAVE A DRAFT
PROGRAM PROCESS THAT WILL BE
PULLED DOWN DURING THIS FIRST
PHASE EXCUSE ME BECAUSE THERE
WILL BE WELL THERE WILL BE
ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
THERE IS NOT WE WANT TO LEARN
THE BEST WAY TO HAVE THE DIALOG
BACK AND FORTH ACROSS THE
COMMUNITY THAT CAN HELP BETTER
INFORM THAT PROCESS DOCUMENT
AND THE ONE EDUCATIONAL
COMPONENT THAT WE'LL HAVE TO
MAKE SURE WE DO A VERY THOROUGH
JOB ON IS ONLY ON NO LOCAL
STREETS WILL ARE ELIGIBLE FOR
THIS PROGRAM AND ONLY THOSE
STREETS UNDER THE JURISDICTION
OF THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
BECAUSE OF THE GRANT THAT WAS
PROVIDED.
OUR ENGAGEMENT MODEL WILL BE
THE INFORMATION ASSAULT MODEL
AND THAT'S IT.
SO I WOULD LOVE TO TAKE SOME
QUESTIONS AND IF I CAN'T ANSWER
THEM I KNOW RAYMOND WILL BACK
ME UP AND SUZANNE, IF I COULD
MAYBE JUST ADD A COUPLE MORE
POINTS.
>> THANK YOU FOR THAT.
ONE OF THE REASON YOU MAY HAVE
HEARD SUZANNE MENTION THAT WE
ARE THINKING ABOUT USING KIND
OF TEMPORARY DEVICES OR THINGS
LIKE THAT ARE THE REASON FOR
THAT IS BASED ON OUR
CONVERSATIONS WITH FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION BECAUSE
OF THE GRANT THAT WE RECEIVE
WHICH WAS A PLANNING GRANT, WE
HAVE TO KIND OF EVALUATE THE
EFFECTIVENESS OF THOSE
DEPLOYMENTS BEFORE THEY CAN BE
PUT IN INCREMENTS.
AND SO THAT IS ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY WE'RE TAKING THAT
APPROACH.
BUT IT ALSO ALLOWS SOME
FLEXIBILITY FOR US.
IT REALLY ALLOWS TO LEARN AND
MAKE ADJUSTMENTS.
>> THAT'S A VALUABLE LESSON
WE'RE LEARNING AS PART OF A
QUICK ONE WHERE WE'VE HAD TO
MAKE ADJUSTMENTS EVEN WITH A
LITTLE LITIGATOR'S.
SO WE THINK THAT APPROACH MAKES
SENSE EVEN IN THIS APPLICATION
AND OUR PRODUCTS AND MARKET
WHERE YOU CAN GET LIKE RECYCLED
RUBBER SPEEDUPS FOR EXAMPLE, IF
HE ACTUALLY DEPLOYS.
SO JUST USING THAT AS KIND
OF AN EXAMPLE AS FOR WHY WE DO
THAT AND THEN MAYBE SUZANNE,
THE OTHER THING I MIGHT JUST
WANT TO UNPACK OR JUST A QUICK
SECOND IS THE ENGAGEMENT IS
INFORM AND CONSULT.
SO THE IDEA MANY OF YOU ARE
FAMILIAR WITH THAT BUT SOME
OF THE SPECTRUM OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT KIND OF STARTS ON
ONE END OF INFORM AND ON THE
OTHER END GOES TO EMPOWER.
>> THE IDEA IS THAT THESE ARE
REALLY DATA DRIVEN DECISIONS.
>> THEY ARE REFLECTED WHAT THE
PLAN SO CITY MANAGEMENT IS NOT
REALLY UP FOR DISCUSSION.
WE ARE DOING SOMETHING SO WE'RE
GOING TO TAKE ENGAGEMENT ON
WHAT WE'RE PROPOSING.
WE'LL MAKE SOME MODIFICATIONS
BASED ON THAT.
BUT REALLY IT'S NOT WE'RE
APPROACHING THIS AS IF
SOMETHING NEEDS TO HAPPEN ON
THESE CORRIDORS AND WE WANT TO
HEAR FROM FOLKS ABOUT WHAT THAT
SOMETHING IS BUT NOT THAT
NOTHING NOTHING IS NOT AN
OPTION IF THERE'S A PROBLEM.
SO SO I WANTED TO MAKE THAT
DISTINCTION BECAUSE I THINK
THAT WILL BE SOMETHING THAT
SOME WILL WANT TO DISCUSS IN
MORE DETAIL.
BUT THAT'S WHERE OUR HEADSPACE
IS AT RIGHT NOW.
AND WITH THAT I'LL TURN IT OVER
TO THE COMMISSION DISCUSSION
QUESTIONS COMMENTS THIS LOOKS
GREAT.
THANKS SO MUCH TO JENNIFER FOR
BRINGING THIS PRESENTATION.
I'M REALLY EXCITED TO SEE THAT
IT'S AN INFORMED MODEL INFORMED
CONSULT.
I THINK THAT'S REALLY GREAT.
THAT'S SO I'M CURIOUS
I GUESS
ABOUT A COUPLE OF THINGS.
ONE, I'M CURIOUS ABOUT THE
KINDS AND SORRY YOU MAY HAVE
SAID THIS I HAVE SOME
DISTRACTIONS THE KINDS OF DATA
COLLECTION AND TRACKING THAT
ARE GOING TO HAPPEN.
SO I KNOW IN OTHER PROJECTS
WHERE THERE HAS BEEN A PUBLIC
BACKLASH, THINGS THAT ARE
REALLY VISIBLE LIKE MAIN
STREET, IT'S BEEN REALLY
VALUABLE TO SAY LIKE YOU'RE
ACTUALLY ONLY BEING SLOWED DOWN
30 SECONDS AT PEAK TIMES OR
WHATEVER KINDS OF DATA IS THERE
TO SORT OF COUNTER THE FEELINGS
THAT PEOPLE BRING TO THESE
KINDS OF THINGS.
AND SO I'M CURIOUS ABOUT WHAT
THAT DATA COLLECTION IS GOING
TO LOOK LIKE AND WHAT THE PLANS
ARE FOR THAT RIGHT NOW.
AND AGAIN, NON ENGINEER I THINK
ONE OF THE BEST PIECES
OF INFORMATION THAT WE CAN HAVE
IS COLLECTING THIS DATA BEFORE
UTILIZING THAT UTILIZING OUR
CURRENT CAMERA TECHNOLOGY TO
SEE WHAT THAT DELAY IS AT THE
SIGNALS AND THAT'S OBVIOUSLY
INTERSECTION BASED.
AND THEN WE CAN ALSO LOOK AT
THE CRASHES WHICH WE ARE
OBVIOUSLY INFORMED OF THOSE
CRASHES AND THEN WE RECEIVED
THE FINALIZED CRASH DATA.
SO I FEEL LIKE THOSE THREE
COMPONENTS STAFF HAVE ACCESS TO
AND ARE EQUIPPED TO BE ABLE TO
ANALYZE FAIRLY QUICKLY AND OUR
USED TO COLLECTING THAT
INFORMATION AND IT WILL HAVE TO
BE A KIND OF BEFORE CONDITION
DURING WE NEED TO LET THINGS
NORMALIZE AND THEN AFTER AND
THAT IS ONE OF THE ITEMS THAT
WE ALSO CALLED OUT IN THE GRANT
APPLICATION.
SO THAT WOULD BE PART OF OUR
REPORTING PROCESS WITHIN
FEDERAL HIGHWAY AS WELL.
OH, THAT SOUNDS GREAT.
I KNOW ANOTHER THING THAT IS
PROBABLY NOT FEASIBLE FOR ALL
OF THESE TREATMENTS BUT THE IN
THE KERRY TOWN PROJECT WHERE WE
HAD THE BEFORE AND AFTER FOR
CARS STOPPING FOR KARDASHIANS
WAS SO DRAMATIC AND I THINK
REALLY COMPELLING FOR A LOT
OF PEOPLE AND I'M JUST THINKING
ABOUT IF THERE ARE POINTS EVEN
IF IT'S NOT LIKE I DON'T I'M
NOT I'M NOT ASKING FOR THIS FOR
EVERYTHING BECAUSE I DON'T WANT
DATA COLLECTION TO SLOW THINGS
DOWN.
BUT AT A POINT PARTICULARLY
PARTICULARLY HIGH PEDESTRIAN
TRAFFIC OR BIKE TRAFFIC, IF
THERE ARE POINTS WHERE WE CAN
GET SOME OF SOME OF THAT DATA
AS WELL, I KNOW THERE'S MORE
BIKE COUNTERS GOING OUT BUT I
THINK THAT COULD ALSO BE REALLY
VALUABLE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT
IT'S HELPING US ACHIEVE.
YEAH, THAT'S ABSOLUTELY ONE
OF THE PIECES THAT WILL BE
COLLECTED IS THAT KIND
OF INFORMATION BECAUSE WE WE
HAVE A LOT OF I THINK I DON'T
WANT TO SAY NAYSAYERS BUT
INDIVIDUALS THAT ARE LIKE BUT I
NEVER SEE A BIKE AND IT'S LIKE
THE MINUTE YOU SEE ONE BIKE YOU
ACTUALLY SEE ALL OF THEM ACROSS
THE CITY.
IT'S KIND OF FUNNY BUT THAT IS
THAT WOULD HAVE TO BE PART
OF THE DATA COLLECTION
COMPONENT AS WELL.
SO WITH A LOT OF THE MY VISION
CAMERAS AND TECHNOLOGY TODAY
IT'S YOU PUT THAT OUT YOU CAN
CAPTURE A LOT OF INFORMATION
NOT JUST THE PADS ON BIKES BUT
WE CAN CAPTURE THE BUSSES.
WE CAN CAPTURE ALL OF THE
SINGLE OCCUPANCY VEHICLES AS
WELL.
PETER, THANKS.
WHAT IS THE TIMELINE FOR
IMPLEMENTING THESE?
>> I MISSPOKE NO, I HAVE GOOD
NEWS ON NO I JUST ORDERED THIS
ARRAIGNMENT TODAY SO WE'VE BEEN
I THINK OVER THE LAST COUPLE
OF MONTHS OUR GRANTS AGREEMENT
I JUST SENT THIS OUR FINAL
VERSION TO OUR MICHIGAN
DIVISION OF FEDERAL HIGHWAY.
THEY ARE TAKING THAT UP ALL
OF THE FOUR OR FIVE OTHER
INDIVIDUALS THAT HAVE TO SIGN
OFF ON IT.
SO I'M WAITING FOR THOSE PIECES
TO BE FINALIZED AND THEN WE
WILL BE ROUTING AND WE WILL BE
WORKING THROUGH OUR KIND OF RFP
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS TO GET
SOMEONE ON BOARD IMMEDIATELY
AND JUST GENERAL THE SAFE
STREETS FOR ALL.
GRANT ALLOWS US FOR FOUR YEARS
TO COMPLETE THE GRANT SO THANK
YOU TO RAYMOND FOR KIND
OF PUSHING A LITTLE BIT MORE
TIMING FOR US TO GET OUR
SUPPLEMENTAL PLANNING GRANT AS
A QUICK FOLLOW UP ON THAT.
SO ISN'T DEPENDENT ON GRANT
LONG TERM IZZARD'S I'M SORRY I
DIDN'T CATCH THE FIRST PART
OF THAT SIR.
>> SORRY TO FOLLOW UP ON THAT
QUESTION.
THE FUNDING FOR THIS PROGRAM IS
NOT WHOLLY DEPENDENT ON THAT
ONE GRANT LONG TERM I WOULD
HOPE.
>> RIGHT AND I WILL PUNT THAT
TO RAYMOND.
YEAH NO WE JUST SEE IT SO WE
WROTE INTO THE GRANT YOU MAY
RECALL FIRST OF ALL WE WROTE A
LOT IN TELEGRAAF PUZZLE AND
THERE WERE PIECES THAT WERE
CHERRY PICKED BY US DANTE AND
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
TO FORM THE TWO PIECES THAT ARE
PARTICULAR TO THIS AS WE HAVE A
QUICK BUILD ELEMENT THEY FUNDED
AS WELL AS SPEED MANAGEMENT.
AND SO SINCE THOSE TWO ITEMS
ARE SPECIFICALLY CALLED OUT IN
THE GRANT WE FEEL LIKE IT'S A
GOOD USE OF THIS FUNDING TO PUT
IT INTO ACTION RIGHT AWAY.
BUT THEN WE DO HAVE OTHER
SOURCES OF FUNDING THAT WE CAN
USE IN THE FUTURE.
THERE'S CLIMATE THERE'S SOME
YOU KNOW WE HAVE THE OLD FUNDS
WHICH IS INCREASINGLY GOING
TOWARDS MAINTENANCE BUT AND
THEN WE CAN ALWAYS PURSUE OTHER
GRANTS AS WELL.
SO SO YEAH, THE IDEA IS TO
REALLY JUMPSTART THIS PROGRAM
IS TO USE THE ASSETS FOR THE
SAFE STREETS FOR ALL FUNDING
BECAUSE WE HAVE THAT ALMOST IN
POCKET NOW AND AGAIN TO THE
SUZANNE SHE HAS BEEN RELENTLESS
IN TRYING TO GET FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ACROSS THE FINISH LINE
WITH US ON THIS GRANT
AGREEMENT.
AND RECALL WE WERE AWARDED THIS
GRANT BACK IN JANUARY.
I THINK WE WENT TO COUNCIL IN
JULY.
I WANT TO SAY OUR AUGUST NOW I
THINK AND SO IT'S STILL US
THREE ADDITIONAL MONTHS TO
HAMMER OUT ALL THE LANGUAGE.
SO SO WE'RE VERY CLOSE TO
ACTUALLY HAVING THAT IN HAND.
AND AS SUZANNE KIND
OF INDICATED, OUR FIRST STEP IS
TO DEVELOP A CONSULTANTS RFP
FOR DESIGN DATA COLLECTION.
ALL OF THOSE PIECES ARE GOING
TO MAKE THIS PROGRAM
SUCCESSFUL.
WE WANT TO GET THEM ON BOARD AS
SOON AS POSSIBLE, HIT THAT RFP,
GET THAT OUT ON THE STREETS
HOPEFULLY SOON AND BRING IN
CONTRACTS COUNCIL AND GET
WORKING ON THAT OVER THE WINTER
AND SORRY ONE OTHER FOLLOW I
THINK HE HAD ASKED ABOUT WHEN
IMPLEMENTATION MIGHT OCCUR.
THE HOPE IS IF ALL GOES WELL
AND THINGS MOVE ACCORDING TO
PACE SOMETIME NEXT CALENDAR
YEAR THAT YOU START SEEING
DEVICES BEING DEPLOYED
ESPECIALLY IF WE CAN MOVE
TOWARDS SOME OF THESE OUT
OF THE BOX SOLUTIONS WITH
RUBBERIZED RECYCLED RUBBER
WHERE WE DON'T HAVE TO WAIT FOR
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT AND
THINGS LIKE THAT, WE CAN BUY
THING AND JUST POP IT DOWN ON
THE ROAD SO THANKS FOR THANK
YOU DARMA.
>> I HAVE TROUBLE FINDING MY
MOUTH.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR THIS
PRESENTATION.
I WAS SURPRISED BECAUSE I
THOUGHT THAT WE WERE GOING TO
BE FOCUSING JUST ON THE TIER
ONE YOU KNOW THOSE BEING THE
MOST CRASH PRONE I THINK AND I
THINK WHAT I HEARD YOU SAY IN
THE PRESENTATION IS THAT WE'RE
ACTUALLY GOING TO BE DOING A
SPECTRUM EVEN IN THIS PHASE ONE
OF LEVEL TIER ONE TIER TWO,
TIER THREE TIER I UNDERSTAND
CORRECTLY OR YEAH.
>> SO ALL OF THESE CAWDOR WERE
IDENTIFIED AS EITHER TIER ONE,
TIER TWO CRASH SEVERITY AND
THERE WAS ANOTHER PIECE SORRY I
SPECIFICALLY ASKED THAT
QUESTION BASED ON THE NUMBERS
AND SEVERITY OF CRASHES AND
WHETHER THEY ARE IDENTIFIED AS
TIER ONE OR TIER TWO AND THEN
THOSE WERE SIMPLY DEFINED BY
DIVIDING THE OVERALL LIST INTO
THREE EQUAL PARTS.
SO WE WANTED TO HIT ALL OF OUR
TIER ONE CORRIDORS.
WE WOULD WANT TO LOOK AT THE
HIGH THE THE ITEMS NOTED IN RED
AND THOSE ARE SOME OF OUR
OBVIOUSLY MOST CHALLENGING
QUARTERS.
THEY ARE MULTI LANE.
THEY ALSO HAVE VERY HIGH
SURFACE TRANSIT ON THEM.
SO WE WANT TO BE PRETTY MINDFUL
OF THAT BALANCING ALL OF THE
SELECTION.
SO SORRY.
JUST TO CLARIFY, THESE ARE OUR
LEVEL ONE JUST GEOGRAPHICALLY
DISPERSED OR OR NOT?
>> YEAH.
I MEAN IF AND RAYMOND PLEASE
FEEL FREE TO JUMP IN.
I MEAN IF WE WANTED TO FOCUS
SPECIFICALLY ON JUST THOSE HIGH
NOTED CORRIDORS WE COULD DO
THAT AND BASED ON THE AVAILABLE
FUNDING WE'RE NOT GOING TO GET
TO ALL THE HIGH, MEDIUM AND LOW
LIKE THERE ARE GOING TO HAVE TO
BE DECISIONS MADE AND IT'S IF
IT'S NO LET'S JUST FOCUS ON THE
ONES THAT HIT TIER ONE
CORRIDORS AND THAT ARE HIGH.
WE CAN ALSO DO THAT.
BUT WE JUST WANTED TO MAKE SURE
THAT EVERYONE KNEW THAT LIKE NO
ROADWAY'S WERE ELIGIBLE AND NO
LOCAL STREETS.
YEAH, YEAH.
IF I COULD JUST MAYBE STATED A
LITTLE DIFFERENTLY FROM HOW MY
BRAIN WORKS IS WE'RE
APPROACHING IT WITH BOTH TIER
ONE AND TIER TWO CORRIDORS ON
THE TABLE.
>> WE ARE LOOKING FOR SOME SORT
OF SHORT TERM SUCCESS AND SO
THERE WE MAY LOOK AT SOME
OF FAILING ARTERIALS BUT WE MAY
ALSO LOOK AT SOME OF A SINGLE
LANE IN EACH DIRECTION
ARTERIALS.
>> OBVIOUSLY THE YOU KNOW, THE
TREATMENTS MIGHT BE DIFFERENT
ACROSS THOSE DIFFERENT ROAD
TYPES AND KIND OF THE CHARACTER
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE AREA.
SO WHILE WE'RE NOT GOING TO SHY
AWAY FROM DOING SOMETHING
DIFFICULT OR CONTROVERSIAL, WE
ALSO WE WANT TO KIND OF BUILD
UP SOME MOMENTUM BEHIND THE
PROGRAM AND DEMONSTRATE REALLY
SUCCESS AS WELL.
SO WE HAVE SOME INTERNAL
THOUGHTS ABOUT WHICH QUARTERS
WE'RE LOOKING AT BUT WE DON'T
WANT TO WE WANT TO LOOK AT THE
DATA.
WE WANT THE CONSULTANT TO HELP
US EVALUATE THAT ONE ALSO THAT
SOME OF THOSE IDEAS PUBLICLY AS
WELL.
SO SO THERE NO FIRM DECISIONS
MADE IN TERMS OF WHICH QUARTER
WE JUST AS SUZANNE SAID, WE
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT THERE'S
KIND OF SOME GEOGRAPHIC
DISTRIBUTION.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
FOCUSING ON A TIER ONE A.U.
CORRIDORS AND THAT THE
TREATMENTS THAT ARE BEING
PROPOSED WILL ACHIEVE THE
EFFECT THAT WE'RE GOING FOR,
WHICH IS RELUCTANCY.
AND IN TERMS OF TIMELINE WHEN
WE COULD EXPECT TO KNOW WHAT
WHAT THE FIRST TREATMENT AREAS
WILL BE, WHEN DO WE THINK THAT
THAT MIGHT BE BY THE END OF THE
YEAR IF EVERYTHING
GOES
SMOOTHLY?
I NEED TO PULL UP MY TIMELINE
SO I DON'T KNOW.
>> I'M REALLY LOOKING AT
FEDERAL WE'RE GETTING READY TO
ENTER FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR BECAUSE
OF THIS GRANT IS FOCUSED AROUND
FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR
OCTOBER ONE.
AND SO WITH LOOKING AT DOING
THE NOT HAVING A GRANT
AGREEMENT, WE CANNOT START ANY
WORK ON ANYTHING YET BEING ABLE
TO GET AN RFP TOGETHER, PUT
THAT UP TO BED, GO THROUGH
CONCEPTUAL DESIGN, NEPA REVIEW
AND PUBLIC I'M THINKING FISCAL
YEAR FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE IF WE CAN MOVE
QUICKER ON THAT GREAT BUT
THAT'S KIND OF THE PROJECT
TIMELINE THAT I HAVE PUT
FORWARD WITH FEDERAL HIGHWAY SO
WOULD BE PROBABLY ANOTHER YEAR
IF WE CAN DO IT FASTER THAN
WE'RE GOING TO DO IT FASTER BUT
THERE ARE PROCESSES INVOLVED
THAT ARE WELL BEYOND MY CONTROL
BECAUSE I'M REALLY SORRY OR
EVEN WE MIGHT SEE STUFF UP IN
THE WINTER.
>> WE MIGHT START SEEING WORK
IN THE WINTER.
OH NOT THIS WINTER.
NO DESIGN AND ONE OF THE
COMPLICATIONS WITH USING
FEDERAL FUNDS IS YOU JUST TALK
ABOUT NEPA AND THE
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FOR
US.
TWENTY THREE WE ARE GOING TO
HAVE TO DO NEPA NOW WE WANT TO
HOPEFULLY HAVE TO DO
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT.
HOPEFULLY WE CAN GO FOR LIKE OH
I KNOW WE WANT TO DO
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT.
THE HOPE IS WE CAN DO
CATEGORICAL EXCLUSION WHICH
PRETTY MUCH MEANS LIKE THIS
PROJECT IS NOT IMPACTFUL ENOUGH
TO HAVE TO DO A WHOLE BUNCH
OF EXTRA DATA COLLECTION AND
ANALYSIS.
>> SO BUT THERE ARE
COMPLICATIONS WITH USING THE
FEDERAL FUNDS AND WE HAVE TO
JUMP THROUGH SOME HOOPS.
THAT'S ONE OF THE REASONS WHY
WE WANT TO HAVE A CONSULTANT TO
HELP US KIND OF HELP STEER THE
SHIP, MAKE SURE WE'RE CHECKING
ALL THOSE BOXES, DOING ALL THE
PROCESSES THAT WE NEED TO BE
DOING AND I'M SORRY I MISREAD
MINOX.
I DID WRITE THAT YOU SAID IT
WORK OVER THE WINTER ON AN
IMPLEMENTATION IT'S HOPED FOR
IN TWENTY TWENTY FOR CALENDAR
YEAR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
OK GOT IT.
JUST GETTING ON MY FISCAL AND
ACTUAL CALENDAR YOU SHOULD SEE
MY SPREADSHEET.
>> IT'S GOT LIKE FOUR YEARS
REGULAR CALENDAR YEARS FEDERAL
FISCAL IT'S VERY CONFUSING FOR
ME SOMETIMES IN Q ALL OTHER
COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS YOU KNOW
AS WE'RE ON BECAUSE I WAS
WATCHING THE THE REVISIONS TO
THE NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
PROGRAM GO THROUGH CITY COUNCIL
LAST MONTH I THINK THERE'S A
PUBLIC HEARING AND A LOT
OF PEOPLE CALLED IN AND SUPPORT
AND A FEW PEOPLE COMMENTED THAT
THE NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
PROGRAM AS REVISED LOOKS GREAT
BUT THEY REALLY WISH THAT WE
COULD APPLY SOMETHING SIMILAR
TO MAJOR ROADS AND MATERIALS
THAT I KEPT THINKING WELL VERY,
VERY SOON THEY'LL GET TO SEE
THIS.
I'VE BEEN EXCITED ABOUT THIS
FOR A LONG TIME.
I'M REALLY GLAD TO GET THIS
ROLLED OUT FOR PEOPLE TO SEE IT
AND TO KNOW ALL THE WORK THAT
OUR CITY STAFF IS PUTTING INTO
HELPING ACHIEVE OUR VISION ZERO
GOALS ACROSS THE CITY NOT JUST
IN NEIGHBORHOODS, MAJOR ROADS
WHERE IT'S REALLY NEEDED.
SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
YOU KNOW, A LOT OF WORK HAS
GONE INTO FINDING THIS PROGRAM
AND CREATING THE KITS AND YEAH,
THIS IS A BIG STEP FORWARD I
THINK SO.
THANK YOU, RAYMOND SUZANNE AND
ALL OF YOUR TEAMS FOR PUTTING
THIS TOGETHER.
LET'S SEE IF THERE'S NOTHING
ELSE.
WE'LL MOVE ON TO THE NEXT TOPIC
WHICH IS SOMEWHAT RELATED TO
THIS I THINK VERY RELATED TO
THIS ROAD RECONFIGURATIONS AND
ROAD DYADS SEVERAL COMMISSION
MEMBERS AS MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC HAVE ASKED FOR A
DISCUSSION ABOUT ROAD DIETS.
SO RAYMOND IS HERE TO GIVE US
AN OVERVIEW OF THE CITY'S
APPROACH.
THIS BACKGROUND CAN INFORM US
IN THE FUTURE IF WE WISH TO
BRING ANY ACTION TO A FUTURE
MEETING ON THIS TOPIC.
SO RAYMOND, IF YOU'D LIKE,
PLEASE GO AHEAD AND TAKE US
THROUGH WHAT YOU WANTED TO SHOW
US.
I AM I'M WORKING WITH THREE
SCREEN AND SOMETIMES WITH THE
NEW SMART POWERPOINT IT USES
ALL THREE SCREENS.
I'M GOING TO TRY TO SHARE THE
RIGHT SCREEN.
LET ME KNOW IF IT'S THE WRONG
SCREEN PLEASE.
>> IT'S
THAT LOOKS RIGHT
.
IT'S PAGES MISSING THERE IS ALL
RIGHT.
>> VERY GOOD.
>> OK, SO YEAH AS BRET MENTIONS
I KNOW THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF INTERESTING DISCUSSION ABOUT
DIETS AND RECONFIGURING.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE HAD A
PLACE OLDER I DO AGENDA SETTING
WITH THE CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR
EVERY MONTH SEVERAL WEEKS IN
ADVANCE OF A MEETING AND WE HAD
THIS AS A PLACEHOLDER ITEM FOR
SEVERAL MONTHS WE WERE LOOKING
FOR A GOOD OPPORTUNITY TO KIND
OF BRING THIS FORWARD AND IT
LOOKED LIKE THERE WAS ENOUGH
TIME ON TODAY'S AGENDA TO DO
THAT.
SO THANK YOU FOR KIND
OF INDULGING THIS DISCUSSION
AND I SUSPECT WE'LL HAVE FUTURE
DISCUSSION ON THE SUBJECT AS
WELL.
SO WHAT I WANTED TO DO IS JUST
START OFF WITH KIND OF A
GENERAL UNDERSTANDING ABOUT
WHAT ROAD RECONFIGURATIONS ROAD
DIETS ARE.
AND SO WHAT I'M GOING TO DO IS
I'M GOING TO JUST READ FROM THE
FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION'S KIND OF MANUAL
ON ROAD DIETS AND THEY SAY A
ROAD OR ROADWAY RECONFIGURATION
CAN IMPROVE SAFETY ON TRAFFIC,
PROVIDE BETTER MOBILITY AND
ACCESS FOR ALL ROAD USERS AND
ENHANCE OVERALL QUALITY OF LIFE
.
A ROAD DIET TYPICALLY INVOLVES
CONVERTING AN EXISTING FOUR
LANE UNDIVIDED ROADWAY TO A
THREE LANE ROADWAY CONSISTING
OF TWO UPTURNS AND A CENTER TWO
WAY LEFT TURN LANE.
TYPICALLY A ROAD DIET IS
IMPLEMENTED ON A ROADWAY WITH A
CURRENT AND FUTURE AVERAGE
TRAFFIC DAILY TRAFFIC OF TWENTY
OR TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND OR
LESS.
AND SO THE GRAPHIC THAT YOU SEE
BEFORE YOU AND IT DESCRIBES THE
SITUATION THAT I JUST KIND
OF VERBALLY MENTIONED WHICH IS
YOU KNOW, TWO LANES EACH
DIRECTION TAKING AWAY ONE
OF THOSE LANES WHICH THEN GIVES
YOU SPACE TO PUT IN A CENTER
LANE SINGLE LINE IN EACH
DIRECTION AND THEN YOU ALSO
HAVE ADDITIONAL ROOM POSSIBLY
FOR BIKE LANES OR OTHER
AMENITIES SOME OF THE BENEFITS
OF ROAD INSTALLATIONS MAY
INCLUDE A REDUCTION OF REAR END
AND LEFT TURN CRASHES DUE TO A
DEDICATED LEFT TURN LANE.
SO AGAIN, AS YOU CAN KIND
OF APPRECIATE FOR CARS AND YOU
KNOW, TRYING TO TURN LEFT THE
CAR BEHIND, IT MAY NOT EXPECT
THAT VEHICLE TO STOP AND
THEREFORE MAY REAR END THAT
VEHICLE.
SO THE ADDITION OF THE CENTER
TURN ALLOWS FOR VEHICLES TO
KIND OF GET OUT OF THE TRAVEL
LANE AND EVEN FOR RETURNING
VEHICLES ALLOWS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR VEHICLES TO KIND OF YOU
KNOW, TAKE THEIR TURN AS IT
WERE.
IT ALSO REDUCES RIGHT ANGLE
CRASHES AS A SIDE STREET
MOTORISTS CROSS THREE VERSUS
FOUR LANES OF TRAVEL.
SO YOU JUST HAVE LESS COGNITIVE
BURDEN TO BE ABLE TO FIND A GAP
ACROSS OR LANES.
YOU ONLY HAVE THREE LANES AND
REALLY TO TRAVEL LANES TO TO
THREAD THE NEEDLE BETWEEN THERE
ARE FEWER LANES FOR PEDESTRIANS
ACROSS.
THERE'S ALSO AN OPPORTUNITY TO
INSTALL PEDESTRIAN REFUGE
ISLANDS IN THAT CENTER TURN
LANE IF THERE ARE NO NEED TO
MAINTAIN BICYCLE LANES AS YOU
SEE ON THE SCREEN ON STREET
PARKING OR TRANSIT STOPS, IT
ALSO HAS A TRAFFIC CALMING
EFFECT AND LEADS TO MORE
CONSISTENT SPEEDS AND IT ALSO
HAS A MORE COMMUNITY FOCUSED
COMPLETE STREETS ENVIRONMENT
THAT BETTER ACCOMMODATES ALL
USERS.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS I WANTED
TO DO IS JUST KIND OF WALK
THROUGH A COUPLE OF THE THINGS
THAT WE HAVE TO DO OR THINGS
THAT WE HAVE TO DO AND THINGS
WE DO WHEN WE EVALUATE ROADS SO
THE FIRST IS THERE IS A
STANDING RESOLUTION.
IT'S RESOLUTION ARE EIGHTEEN TO
SEVENTY FIVE WHICH READS THAT
ANY PROPOSED REDUCTION CITY
STAFF WILL PROVIDE COUNSEL
CURRENT TRAFFIC VOLUME DATA
INCLUDING POWER VOLUMES AND
VOLUME RATIOS AS WELL AS
PROJECTIONS FOR SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS AND TRAFFIC DELAYS
.
IF YOU'RE NOT FAMILIAR WITH THE
TERM VOLUME TO CAPACITY THAT'S
TO BE OVERSEE OR OFTENTIMES
REFERRED TO AS LEVEL OF SERVICE
AND SO THESE ARE SOME OF THE
REQUIREMENTS THAT WE HAVE TO
REPORT TO COUNCIL AS PART
OF ANY ROAD RECONFIGURING OR
ROAD PROJECTS.
>> THEN THE OTHER THING WE
ALWAYS TURN TO OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I WANTED
TO MENTION IS FOR THOSE OF YOU
FAMILIAR WITH THE PREVIOUS
TRANSPORTATION PLAN OR THE NON
MOTORISTS PLAN, THERE WAS A MAP
THAT SPECIFICALLY CALLED OUT
ROAD DIETS THE EXISTING MOVING
TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION ZERO
PLAN DOES NOT HAVE SUCH A MAP.
IT'S MORE A TOOL IN THE TOOL
FOR ACHIEVING VISION ZERO.
SO YOU ALREADY HEARD SUZANNE
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT SPEED
MANAGEMENT TOOL KIT WHICH IS AN
OUTGROWTH OF THE VISION ZERO
INITIATIVE AND SO IT REALLY
TALKS ABOUT SOME OF THE
COUNTERMEASURES THAT WE CAN
USE.
IT IDENTIFIES RECONFIGURATIONS
TO ADDRESS DANGEROUS BEHAVIORS,
PARTICULARLY SPEED AND THAT
DESCRIPTION READS THAT IN A
STRAIGHT RECONFIGURATIONS ROUTE
AS DEMONSTRATED SAFETY BENEFITS
OFTEN REDUCING TRAVEL SPEEDS
AND MAKING IT EASIER AND SAFER
FOR PEOPLE WALKING ACROSS THE
STREET BY SIMPLIFYING AND
CROSSING A ROAD THAT REDUCES
THEIR OVERALL NUMBER AND OR
SIZE OF TRAVEL LANES ON THE
STREET AND REPURPOSE THAT SPACE
FOR OTHER USES SUCH AS BICYCLE
INFRASTRUCTURE, DEDICATED
TRANSIT FACILITIES OR PUBLIC
SERVICE.
SOME OTHER RESOURCES WE TURN TO
QUITE REGULARLY.
WE FOLLOW THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF CITY
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS, OUR
NACCHO.
IF YOU'RE NOT TOO FAMILIAR WITH
THAT TOO I
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT
IT A LITTLE BIT IN TIMES PAST
BUT NACCHO WAS REALLY A A
RESPONSE FROM SOME OF THE
LARGER MUNICIPALITIES THAT WERE
QUITE FRANKLY GETTING
FRUSTRATED AND IMPATIENT WITH
HOW LONG IT WAS TAKING PASHTO
ASHA-ROSE THE AMERICAN
ASSOCIATION OF STATE HIGHWAY
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS.
SO AS YOU CAN IMAGINE THERE'S
MAYBE A DISCONNECT THERE
SIMILAR TO HOW WE HAD A
DIFFERENCE OF OPINIONS WITH THE
STATE DUTY.
SO NATO WAS FORMED IN THIS VERY
DATA DRIVEN AND THEY BELIEVE A
LOT OF EXPERIMENTATION AND
REALLY ITERATION AND THEN THEY
HAVE A LOT OF THE DATA TO BACK
IT UP SO THEY HAVE A LOT
OF GREAT RESOURCES THAT ARE
FREE INCLUDING THE URBAN
HIGHWAY DESIGN GUIDELINES AND
URBAN STREET DESIGN GUIDELINES
AND OTHERS.
AND SO ROAD DIETS ARE PRETTY
HEAVILY IDENTIFIED IDENTIFIED
THERE AND A FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION ALSO HAS SOME
REALLY GOOD INFORMATION AND
RESOURCES RELATED TO ROAD DIETS
YOU ALREADY HEARD AND READ FROM
SOME OF THAT IS SOME VERY GOOD
CHECKLISTS, SOME GOOD PROCESS
FOR EVALUATION THAT WE'VE USED
IN SOME OF OUR PAST ANALYZES
OF THE TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH
BOARD OR CARB IS UNDER THE
NATIONAL ACADEMIES OF SCIENCE
AND THEY WILL OFTEN PRODUCE
TECHNICAL REPORTS SOMETIMES
CALLED HRP THE NATIONAL
COOPERATIVE.
>> I REMEMBER THE BOWL TITLE
LET'S THE NATIONAL PARK HIGHWAY
RESEARCH PROGRAM SO THEY HAVE
BEST PRACTICES TO ACHIEVE IN
CONTEXT SENSITIVE SOLUTIONS.
THEY HAVE OTHER RESOURCES
RELATED TO ROAD DIETS THAT WE
CAN OFTEN GO TO TO ANALYZE
THEIR EFFECTIVENESS IN WHICH
DATA WE SHOULD COLLECTING AND
SO FORTH AND SO ON.
THEN WE ALSO HAVE THE INSTITUTE
OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS OR
ITTE THEY DEVELOP A LOT
OF TECHNICAL MANUALS ABOUT SO
FOR EXAMPLE THE TRIP GENERATION
MANUAL AND OTHER MANUAL IT HAS
THEIR FINGERPRINTS ON A LOT
OF THOSE DOCUMENTS AND SO WE
WILL OFTENTIMES LOOK TO SEE
SOME OF THE RESEARCH THAT'S
COMING OUT OF I.T. RELATED TO
ROAD DIETS, ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS AND YOU MIGHT
BE SURPRISED TO SEE HIM OUT ON
HERE AND THAT DOES HAVE A ROAD
CHECKLIST AND WE SOMETIMES USE
THAT BECAUSE ESPECIALLY IF
FEDERAL FUNDS ARE BEING USED OR
ANY STATE FUNDS ARE BEING USED,
WE LIKE TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
ARE PRESENTING A CASE IN SUCH A
WAY THAT AND UNDERSTANDS THAT
AND SO WE WILL USE KIND
OF THEIR FORMULAS OR THEIR KIND
OF FRAMEWORK OF WHICH DATA
SHOULD BE COLLECTED AND WHAT
THOSE INTENDED BENEFITS ARE AS
PART OF THE ROAD DIET.
>> SO NOW WHAT I'D LIKE TO DO
AND I WILL NOTE THIS IS NOT AN
EXHAUSTIVE LIST OF EVERY ROAD
THAT WE HAVE DONE OR WILL DO.
IT'S REALLY JUST MEANT TO KIND
OF GIVE A LITTLE CONTEXT IN
TERMS OF SOME OF THE MORE
RECENT ROAD RECONFIGURING ONES
THAT I'M KIND OF FAMILIAR WITH
SINCE I'VE BEEN HERE AT THE
CITY OVER THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
SO WHEN I FIRST CAME TO TOWN IN
TWENTY EIGHTEEN WE JUST PUT IN
THE NORTH MAPLE ROAD SO AGAIN
YOU CAN SEE THE PICTURE ON THE
LEFT IS THE BEFORE CONDITION
WHICH WAS TWO LANES OF TRAVEL
IN EACH DIRECTION AND THEN THE
AFTER CONDITION IS THE PICTURE
ON THE RIGHT WE CHOSE ONE LANE
IN EACH DIRECTION CENTER TURN
LANE AND A BUFFER BIKE LANE.
SO THIS IS A CLASSIC EXAMPLE
OF A ROAD TAKING A FOUR TO
THREE WITH A BICYCLE AMENITY.
ONE THING TO NOTE IS YOU MAY
NOTE THAT THE BICYCLE LANE
PICTURED HERE IS JUST PAINT THE
ROAD BUT SUSANNE AND SIGERSON
TAHITI ARE WORKING ON QUICK
BILLS TO POINT OUT WHICH WILL
TAKE ELEVEN MILES OF EXISTING
BIKE LANES INCLUDING THIS ONE
AND START INSTALLING VERTICAL
DELINEATOR THEREFORE MAKING
THEM PROTECTED BIKE LANES OR
CYCLE TRACKS IF YOU WILL SO YOU
WILL HAVE VERTICAL SEPARATION
FOR THE MAPLE ROAD BIKE LANE
FROM MOTORISTS AND BICYCLE
ANOTHER RECENT PROJECT IS
S-BAHN.
SO AGAIN PICTURE ON THE LEFT.
THIS IS AGAIN A CLASSIC EXAMPLE
YOU HAD SURE YOU HAVE TWO LANES
IN EACH DIRECTION.
WE DID THE ROAD TWO YEARS AGO,
TOOK AWAY TWO LANES CENTER TURN
LANE ALMOST SIMILAR TO WHAT YOU
HAVE IN MAPLE BUFFER BIKE LANES
WHICH AGAIN WILL ALSO BE
UPGRADED TO PROTECTED BIKE
LANES OR CYCLE TRACKS WITH THE
ADDITION OF DILATORS HOPEFULLY
WE'RE FINISHING DESIGN ON THAT
SO THAT WE'RE GOING TO LAUNCH
THAT PROJECT RELATIVELY SOON.
UM, A LITTLE SIDEBAR I WILL SAY
THERE WAS NO MESSING WITH THE
THERE WAS NO PHOTOSHOP INVOLVED
ASIDE FROM CROPPING OF THESE
PHOTOS FROM STREET VIEW.
SO YOU'LL NOTICE THE GRAY
DREARY WE WROTE DIET PICTURES
ON THE LEFT AND BOTH THE CASE
OF MAPLE AND MAIN AND THE
BRIGHT SUNNY BLUE SCENARIO
AFTER SO THAT IS NOT THAT'S
JUST HOW GOOGLE STREET VIEW
SEES THE WORLD.
SO I JUST WANTED TO LET YOU
KNOW AND SOME PROJECTS THAT ARE
CURRENTLY UNDERWAY ACTUALLY
THIS PROJECT JUST RECENTLY
OPENED UP SO THAT PURSUANT TO
DIRECTION THAT WE RECEIVE FROM
COUNCIL TO INCORPORATE AND ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES LIKE
FACILITY ON PLATS THIS IS JUST
NORTH OF PACARD.
WE WENT AHEAD AND TOOK AWAY ONE
OF THE NORTHBOUND TRAVEL LANES
AND WE'RE ABLE TO PUT IN A
PROTECTED BIKE LANE HAS BETTER
RECEIVING FACILITIES OUT
OF PACARD SO THIS ISN'T THE
REAL TRADITIONAL ROUTE.
THEY DIDN'T GO NECESSARILY FROM
A FOUR LANE TWO OR THREE LANE
BUT INSTEAD YOU HAVE KIND
OF THIS MERGE SCENARIO.
YOU HAVE SOME EXTRA LANES AND
SO WE WERE ABLE TO REPURPOSE
ONE OF THOSE LANES AND UNIQUE
TO BE ABLE TO PUT IN A
DEDICATED BIKE SO ANOTHER
PROJECT THAT JUST KICKED OFF
CONSTRUCTION LAST MONTH IS YOUR
HEART.
SO AGAIN, SOME OF YOU HAVE BEEN
ON THE COMMISSION MAY RECALL
BACK IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN I THINK
IT WAS OR MAYBE EVEN EARLY TWO
THOUSAND NINETEEN THAT WAS A
PROPOSAL TO CONSIDER A
TEMPORARY DEPLOYMENT FOR YOUR
HEART.
WE THIS PROJECT WAS UP FOR
RESURFACING AND SOME WATER MAIN
AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS AND SO
IS THE OPPORTUNITY TO REVISIT
THOSE ISSUES WITH THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT ON IT.
AND SO THIS PROJECT AGAIN IT'S
IT'S NOT A TRADITIONAL ROAD
DIET WHERE THERE'S YOU KNOW,
THE FOUR LANE TO THREE LANE
BECAUSE IT'S A BOULEVARD
SECTION WHERE YOU HAVE A VERY
WIDE MEDIAN ON THE SECTION
OF YOUR HEART.
BUT LOOKING AT THE TRAFFIC
LANES, LOOKING AT SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS AND OTHERS, WE
WERE ABLE TO JUSTIFY REMOVAL
OF ONE OF THOSE LANES AND EACH
DIRECTION WHICH WILL MAKE FOR A
VERY COMFORTABLE, VERY WIDE
BICYCLE FACILITY.
AND IF YOU'RE LOOKING AT THIS
CONFIGURATION WONDERING WHY THE
AFTER CONDITION SHOWS KIND OF A
LITTLE CURVATURE OF THE
ROADWAY.
THAT'S BECAUSE WE'RE ALSO
INSTALLING SOME ROUNDABOUTS
WHERE THERE WERE SOME VERY WIDE
KIND OF NO PERSON'S LAND
OF ASPHALT.
SOME OF THAT THAT SPACE WILL BE
CLARIFIED IN TERMS OF WHERE
PEOPLE SHOULD.
SO SOME OF THOSE APPROACHES
HAVE BEEN REALIGNED SO THAT
PEOPLE ENTERING THE ROUNDABOUT
CAN APPROACH THEM AT KIND
OF THE PROPER ANGLE TALKING
ABOUT WHAT'S NEXT.
SO YOU HEARD TONIGHT FROM
SUZANNE ABOUT THE CITY
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
LANE REDUCTIONS ARE
SPECIFICALLY CALLED OUT FOR IN
THAT TOOL.
SO THERE ARE A LOT OF TOOLS IN
THAT TOOLKIT.
THERE ARE TRAFFIC CALMING TYPE
THINGS THAT YOU WOULD TYPICALLY
SEE ON OUR NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
COMING PROGRAMS SUCH AS
PUMPHOUSE CHICANES VERTICAL
DEVICES RAISED CROSSWALKS,
HOMES, THINGS LIKE THAT.
BUT YOU ALSO HAVE LANE
NARROWING WHICH WE HAVE DONE IN
RECENT EXAMPLES.
NOW I DIDN'T GO INTO A LOT
OF DETAIL ON THOSE EXAMPLES BUT
FOR EXAMPLE WE RECENTLY
NARROWED THE LANES ON PACARD
EAST ACAD WHICH ALLOWED US TO
PUT IN THE BIKE LANE WHICH THEN
LED TO A DECREASE IN SPEED
WHICH ALLOWED US TO REDUCE THE
POSTED SPEED LIMIT.
SO WE'RE USING KIND
OF MODIFICATIONS OF NOT MAYBE
FOR ROAD DIETS BUT ACTUALLY THE
ACTUAL LANE NARROWINGS AS WELL
.
SO THIS IS A TOOL IN THE TOOL
KIT.
I CAN'T PROMISE YOU WHETHER OR
NOT ROADWAYS ARE GOING TO BE
PART OF THIS FIRST ROUND OF THE
SPEED MANAGEMENT THE IS THAT WE
JUST TALKED THAT'S GOING TO BE
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT'S ON THE
TABLE FOR CONSIDERATION.
WE HAVE ON BOARD TO HELP US
EVALUATE WHAT THE OPPORTUNITIES
ARE.
THE OTHER THING I WANTED TO
KNOW IS IN TERMS OF THE NUMBER
OF QUARTERS THAT WE HAVE THAT
ARE MULTI LANE THERE THERE
AREN'T A LOT UNDER THE CITY'S
JURISDICTION.
THERE'S A SMALL HANDFUL.
SO WE HAVE A STADIUM.
WE HAVE THESE PACKARD
EISENHOWER WE HAVE S IN AND I
MEAN NOT IN OUR BOW AND OUR
FIRST LINE IT'S PRETTY
EMBARRASSING.
I SPILLED AS A NO EMPLOYEE
APOLOGIES ABOUT SOUTH STATE ST.
JOHN PARKWAY AND FULLER AND SO
THESE REPRESENT OPPORTUNITIES
THEY SOME OF THEM ARE PROBABLY
GOING TO BE EASIER THAN OTHERS
.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I I
DIDN'T GO DEEP INTO THE
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS THAT'S
REQUIRED BUT THIS LITTLE
GRAPHIC ON THE RIGHT IS KIND
OF MEANT TO ENCAPSULATE I WENT
THROUGH SOME OF THE OLD MEMOS
THAT WE'VE PROVIDED COUNSEL IN
TERMS OF THE THINGS THAT WE
LOOK AT AND HAVE TO LOOK AT SO
SAFETY IS REALLY THE DRIVING
FACTOR OF WHAT IT IS WE'RE
TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH.
BUT A LOT OF OTHER THINGS KIND
OF GET FOLDED INTO THE
DISCUSSION AS WELL.
SO YOU KNOW, THERE'S THE
ENGAGEMENT AND THE SUPPORT THAT
WE HEAR FROM THE COMMUNITY AS
WELL AS DECISION MAKERS AND
OTHERS.
THERE'S THE DATA COLLECTION
THAT'S REQUIRED AND WE WANT TO
LOOK AT SPEEDS, CRASHES THEN
YOU HAVE OTHER SORT
OF ANCILLARY USES ALONG THE
CORRIDOR.
WHAT ARE THE DRIVEWAYS?
WHAT ARE THE TRANSIT USES?
WHAT ARE THE FUTURE TRANSIT
USES?
IS RAPID TRANSIT IDENTIFIED?
WE HAVE LAND USE DISCUSSIONS
TO
THINK THROUGH ESPECIALLY WITH
THE NEW ONE ZONING DISTRICT.
THAT'S MY VIEW MENTIONED THIS
EVENING WHEN WE MENTIONED THAT
EARLIER OBVIOUSLY NON MOTORIZED
OPPORTUNITIES, A LOT OF WHAT'S
DRIVEN OUR ROAD OF THE PAST HAS
BEEN THE NON MOTORIZED PLAN OR
EVEN THE ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
TYPE NETWORK AND ITS
PREDECESSORS TO SAY OH WE HAVE
TO PUT IN A BIKE FACILITY AND
THE ONLY THE ONLY WAY FOR US TO
PUT IN THAT IS TO PUT IN A
ROAD.
AND SO THAT IS LARGELY BEING
ONE OF THE MAIN DRIVERS FOR HOW
WE'VE DONE OUR WORK IN THE
PAST.
BUT WE KNOW WE NEED TO THINK A
LITTLE BIT MORE HOLISTICALLY
AND BROADLY IN TERMS OF SOME
OF THE OTHER BENEFITS AS WELL.
THEN A COUPLE OF OTHER THINGS.
YOU KNOW, TRAFFIC AND KIND
OF CONGESTION VEHICULAR DELAYED
THAT IS SOMETHING WE HAVE TO
REPORT TO THE COUNCIL ON
PURSUANT TO THAT RESOLUTION.
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT IS
STILL KIND OF BAKED INTO THE
PROCESS AND THEN PARKING IS
ANOTHER THING WHETHER THERE'S
OPPORTUNITY TO PUT IN ON-STREET
PARKING OR REVIEW ON STREET
PARKING ONE OF THE ROAD I
THOUGHT I DIDN'T HIGHLIGHT AS
IT WAS KIND OF ATYPICAL IS WE
DID HAVE A ROAD ON WOOD.
WE WERE ABLE TO PUT IN A BIKE
FACILITY BY REMOVING ONE OF THE
TRAVEL LANES.
BUT WE ALSO WERE ABLE TO PUT IN
SOME ON-STREET PARKING OVER
THERE AND THAT WAS ACTUALLY BY
REMOVAL OF A CENTER TURN LANE
BECAUSE WE LOOKED AT HOW MANY
PEOPLE WERE USING THAT CENTER
LANE AND IT WAS VERY FEW.
SO THAT WAS A KIND OF ATYPICAL
APPLICATION OF A ROAD DIET.
BUT IT JUST GOES TO SHOW HOW
YOU CAN APPROACH THESE THINGS
THROUGH DIFFERENT LENSES IN
TERMS WHAT THE OUTCOMES ARE
THAT YOU WANT TO ACHIEVE AND
THE LAST THING I WANTED TO
MENTION IN THE SPACE IS WE DO
SOMETIMES GET CONCERNS FROM
ADJACENT NEIGHBORHOOD IS SOME
OF THE SPILLOVER TRAFFIC.
IT IS VERY DIFFICULT FOR US TO
KNOW THE FULL EXTENT OF THAT
THERE THERE IS A WAY TO
QUANTIFY THAT.
THERE IS A WAY TO STUDY THAT.
BUT IT ALSO IT IT'S SOMETIMES
HARD TO KNOW HOW FAR THAT
SPILLOVER EFFECT IS.
SO TO THE EXTENT WE CAN WE TRY
TO ANALYZE IT.
WE TRY TO LOOK AT WHERE THERE'S
DATA AND IF THERE ISN'T THE
DATA MAYBE LOOK AT WHAT SOME
OF THE USAGE PATTERNS ARE AND
MAKE SOME INFORMED DECISIONS
ABOUT WHAT THAT SPILLOVER
EFFECTS INTO ADJACENT
NEIGHBORHOODS MIGHT BE.
SO YOU KNOW, IT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE ARE MINDFUL OF IN TERMS
OF SOLVING ONE PROBLEM AND
HOPEFULLY NOT CREATING ANOTHER.
SO ALL OF THAT KIND OF IS BAKED
INTO THE ANALYSIS WHICH THEN
LEADS US TO A DECISION.
AND SO I THINK WITH THAT PRETTY
MUCH CONCLUDES THE THINGS I
WANTED TO HIGHLIGHT AGAIN, I
KNOW THIS IS A VERY CURSORY
OVERVIEW.
THIS IS JUST KIND OF AN
INTRODUCTION OF THE CONCEPT SO
THAT MAYBE WE'RE SHARING OUR
COMMON UNDERSTANDING ABOUT WHAT
ROTIS ARE AND WHAT SOME
OF THOSE FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES
ARE.
>> AND I SUSPECT WE'LL WANT TO
HAVE FUTURE DISCUSSIONS ON THIS
TOPIC AS WELL.
THANK YOU.
DISCUSSION ON THIS MULLY I
STILL LIKE GOING FIRST NOT NOT
CHAIR ANYMORE SO I REALLY
APPRECIATED THAT YOU GAVE US A
COMPLETE LIST OF ALL THE MULTI
LANE ROADS IN THE CITY.
HOW MANY OF THOSE HAVE VOLUMES?
OVER TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND A DAY
.
YOU KNOW IT'S FUNNY YOU ASK
THAT BECAUSE I WAS GOING TO PUT
TOGETHER A TABLE THAT SHOWED
WHICH ROADS LIKE WHAT VOLUMES
WERE ONE OF THE THINGS I WILL
SAY IS A LOT OF THE VOLUME
COUNTS THAT I HAVE ARE PRE
PANDEMIC SO THAT DATA PROBABLY
NEEDS TO BE REFRESHED.
THE OTHER THING TO NOTE IS SOME
SEGMENTS OF RODWAY MAY HAVE
VEHICULAR VOLUMES THAT ARE
RELATIVELY HIGH.
FOR EXAMPLE, LAST TIME I
CHECKED PLIMOTH RIGHT NEAR THE
FREEWAY HAD AN AVERAGE DAILY
TRAFFIC VOLUME OF CLOSE TO
THIRTY THOUSAND IF I'M NOT
MISTAKEN.
BUT AREAS TO THE WEST THAT FOR
EXAMPLE WHEN YOU GET PAST GREEN
DROP OFF RIGHT.
LET'S GET THAT DOWN PARKWAY
THEY PROBABLY DROP BELOW THE
TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND OR MAYBE
EVEN A TWENTY THOUSAND
THRESHOLD AND WE DO SEE THAT A
LOT AROUND THE INTERSTATES,
ESPECIALLY THE VEHICLES THAT
ARE COMING OFF THE FREEWAY
RAMP.
THEY TEND TO DISPERSE RIGHT
AFTER THAT BUT RIGHT AROUND THE
INTERCHANGES THEY TEND TO HAVE
A LOT OF TRAFFIC.
SO THAT'S JUST THE LONG WINDED
WAY OF SAYING I DON'T HAVE A
GREAT ANSWER IN TERMS OF WHICH
OF THESE ROADS ARE I KNOW THERE
ARE SOME THAT ARE WELL THAT
DEFINITELY ARE UNDER THAT
PRESSURE FROM PARKWAY, FOR
EXAMPLE.
BUT THEN WHEN YOU LOOK AT FOR
EXAMPLE, FULLER IN FRONT OF THE
HOSPITAL, IT IS PROBABLY A
LITTLE HIGHER THAN OTHER
PLACES.
SO LONG STORY SHORT, IT IS
SOMETHING WE PROBABLY HAVE TO
GO OUT, MAKE SURE WE HAVE MORE
RECENT COUNTS TO REALLY
UNDERSTAND THE BREADTH OF HOW
MANY VEHICLES ARE USING THE
SCORES.
I HAVE ANOTHER QUESTION.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S HELPFUL.
SO IT'S HELPFUL TO KNOW THAT
ROAD DIETS ARE CONSIDERED PART
OF THE SPEECH WITH SPEED
MANAGEMENT TOOL KIT.
BUT I'M WONDERING IF WE WANTED
TO SORT OF PUSH FOR A MORE
AGGRESSIVE TIMELINE OF ROAD
DIETS, IS THAT SOMETHING THAT
WOULD NEED TO COME FROM
COUNCIL?
IS IT SOMETHING THAT STAFF IS
EMPOWERED TO DO CURRENTLY?
YES AND YES.
RIGHT.
I MEAN SO WITH THE COUNCIL
REPEAL RESOLUTION I HAD BEEN
TALKING POINTS
YES IT WAS
RESOLUTION NINETEEN, DASH ONE
THIRTY NINE THAT WAS THE
RESOLUTION IT REQUIRED COUNCIL
APPROVAL OF ALL ROAD DIETS AND
THAT WAS REPEALED.
SO THAT'S TO SAY THAT WE DO NOT
NEED COUNCIL APPROVAL IN ORDER
OR A ROAD TO ADVANCE.
>> HOWEVER THERE ARE INSTANCES
ROAD WHERE COUNCIL GAVE VERY
SPECIFIC DIRECTIONS AND WE
EXECUTED SO I THINK IT CAN TAKE
EITHER FORM.
ONE OF THE THINGS I WILL SAY
AND I KIND OF ALLUDED TO IT
EARLIER I THINK SOME OF THESE
CORRIDORS WILL BE A LITTLE BIT
EASIER OR CONSIDERATION THAN
OTHERS.
AND ONE OF THE REASONS WHY I
BRING THIS UP IS, YOU KNOW,
WE'RE IN ONGOING DISCUSSIONS
WITH OUR FRIENDS AT THE RAIJA.
THEY DO HAVE SOME SOME PLANS
FOR HIGHER ORDER TRANSIT
WHETHER THAT'S EXPRESS ROUTES
AND OR BUS RAPID TRANSIT ROUTES
.
AND SO WHEN WE TALK ABOUT ROADS
LIKE PLYMOUTH IS A GOOD EXAMPLE
I THINK IS ONE OF THE CORRIDORS
YOU KNOW, THE QUESTION IS
SHOULD SHOULD WE GO OUT AND
ROAD DIED NOW IF THERE IS A
PLAN FOR TRANSIT TO COME BACK
AND RECLAIM SOME OF THAT SPACE
OR DEDICATED TRANSIT LANES IF
WE EVER WANT TO DO A TRUE BUS
RAPID TRANSIT.
AND SO I JUST SAY ALL THAT TO
SAY THESE ARE SOME OF THE SORT
OF CONSIDERATIONS TRADE OFFS,
THINGS GOING THROUGH OUR MIND
IN TERMS OF WHICH QUARTERS WE
HAVE RECEIVED IN THE PAST,
WHICH ONES WE PERHAPS THINK
MAYBE WE SHOULD WAIT A LITTLE
IT ON INDIVIDUALLY.
THERE MAY HAVE BEEN SOME MISSED
OPPORTUNITIES.
I THERE WAS SOME SOME CONCERN
AND CRITICISM ABOUT US NOT
TAKING ADVANTAGE OF THE
RESURFACING THAT OCCURRED ON
HEREM PARKWAY.
WE SHOULD HAVE LOOKED MORE
CLOSELY AT THE OPPORTUNITY FOR
A ROAD DIET.
I THINK THAT'S A FAIR COMMENT.
IT JUST WAS NOT SOMETHING WE
FELT LIKE WE HAD ENOUGH OF THE
INFORMATION AND DATA ON IT JUST
QUITE FRANKLY WASN'T ON OUR
RADAR AND THAT'S NOT AN
ADEQUATE EXCUSE BUT IT JUST IT
WASN'T SOMETHING WE ANALYZED SO
SO YEAH.
IT'S JUST THERE'S A SPECTRUM I
THINK IN TERMS OF FEASIBILITY
IN TERMS OF YES.
MAYBE IT'S PROBABLY THE EASIER
WORD OR BETTER WORD AND BUT
AGAIN IT IS REALLY TRYING TO
ACHIEVE THOSE OUTCOMES WE
HIGHLIGHTED AT THE BEGINNING
OF THE PRESENTATION.
>> THANKS THANK YOU FOR ASKING
THE EXACT QUESTIONS I WANTED TO
ASK MOLLY APPRECIATE IT DERMO
THANKS FOR THE PRESENTATIONS.
I APPRECIATE THAT YOU BROUGHT
UP HOW THIS INTERSECTS WITH
LAND USE PLANNING BECAUSE ONE
THING I'M THINKING A LOT ABOUT
AS WE DO TAKE ONE IS THE KIND
OF IF WE'RE PUTTING A BUNCH
OF DENSE HOUSING ALONG STADIUM
FOR EXAMPLE, NUMBER ONE WE
PROBABLY WANT THINK ABOUT HOW
WE FACILITATE BUS YOU KNOW,
THROUGHPUT IN THAT AREA AND TO
THINK ABOUT HOW WE MAKE IT LESS
LESS OF A PLACE THAT YOU GO
THROUGH ON YOUR WAY TO
SOMEWHERE ELSE AND THEN IT IS
LIKE A PLACE TO BE.
AND SO I DON'T KNOW THE
OPPORTUNITY TO THINK ABOUT THAT
INTERSECTION IS HOW IT
INTERSECTS WITH THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN.
BUT THAT'S WHY DIETS ARE ON MY
MIND A LOT NOT ONLY FOR OUR
VISION ZERO PURPOSES BUT ALSO
JUST THINKING ABOUT THE KIND
OF PLACE THAT YOU KNOW, TRYING
TO PUT A LOT OF PEOPLE.
YEAH, IT'S IT'S A GREAT
QUESTION ESPECIALLY IN A LIKE
YOU KNOW, STADIUM THERE ARE
OPPORTUNITIES THERE BECAUSE
OF THE CONFIGURATION OF THAT
ROADWAY.
BUT IN TERMS OF THE EXISTING
ENVIRONMENT, ESPECIALLY FOR
BIKES AND PEDS, IT'S NOT
PARTICULARLY PLEASANT.
>> AND THEN, YOU KNOW, SOME
INFORMATION ABOUT IT AND THEN
TO THE POINT YOU MENTIONED
ABOUT TRANSIT, WHAT'S ITS ROLE
IN THAT CORRIDOR IN THE FUTURE
AS WELL?
AND SO SO YEAH, I THINK THOSE
ARE ALL SOME OF THOSE KIND
OF BIG PICTURE QUESTIONS AND
SOME OF THE SORT OF THINGS THAT
GO THROUGH OUR MIND WHEN WE
LOOK AT THESE THINGS AND SO
YEAH AND I'VE HEARD A LOT
OF THESE I'VE BEEN IN
DISCUSSIONS WITH LEONARD AND
KELLY A LOT ABOUT THIS ONE AND
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT KIND OF THE
ROAD CONFIGURATION ON STADIUM.
WE DON'T HAVE ANY CURRENT PLANS
FOR DIETING THAT THAT'S NOT TO
SAY THAT WE CAN'T OR CAN'T LOOK
AT THAT IN THE FUTURE BUT OUR
ATTENTION RIGHT
NOW IS FOCUSED
ON SOME OF THESE OTHER TOOLS
THAT WE'VE TALKED ABOUT.
SO BUT I AM CURIOUS TO SEE HOW
WHAT COMES OUT OF THIS ONE AND
SOME OF THE DIRECTION THAT WE
HEAR FROM PLANNING COMMISSION
AND COUNCIL ABOUT YOU KNOW,
WHAT SHOULD HELP GUIDE THOSE
DECISIONS.
YEAH, ANOTHER FOLLOW UP
QUESTION IN TERMS OF COUNCIL
DIRECTION, I'M NOT SURE IF YOU
CAN ANSWER THIS RIGHT NOW BUT
LIKE HOW MUCH OF AN IMPEDIMENT
IS THE RESOLUTION THAT YOU PUT
UP TO BEING ABLE TO DO THESE
THINGS LIKE DOES MAKE IT TO
MAKE IT A DETERRENT AS AN
OPTION ON THE TABLE AS YOU LOOK
AT DIFFERENT FARMING OPTIONS
AND WHAT IS THE BEST FOR A
GIVEN CORRIDOR BECAUSE I THINK
SOME OF THE LANGUAGE AROUND VMT
SORRY THAT ON VMT AROUND LEVEL
OF SERVICE I THINK THERE'S
PRETTY STRONG EVIDENCE THAT
USING THAT AS A MEASURE
GENERALLY HAS HELPED CONGESTION
.
IT'S CONTRARY TO OUR OTHER
VALUES AND GOALS.
SO ANYWAY I JUST WONDER YOU
KNOW WHERE THERE'S ROOM FOR
COUNCIL TO PROVIDE MORE
DIRECTION OR TO REVERSE POLICY
THAT MAY BE A HINDRANCE.
>> YEAH I HAVE A FULL ANSWER.
I WILL SAY MY INTERPRETATION
OF THAT RESULT WAS THAT I
SHOWED ON SCREEN EARLIER IS
PRETTY AUTOMOBILE FOCUSED.
RIGHT?
I MEAN IT REALLY TALKS ABOUT,
YOU KNOW, VOLUMES LEVEL
OF SERVICE TRAFFIC DELAYS.
RIGHT.
SO IT DOESN'T REALLY TALK ABOUT
HOW MANY BISON AS WE USE THE
HARDWARE OR WHAT'S THAT
EXPERIENCE LIKE.
BUT THAT BEING SAID, I THINK A
LOT OF THE TOOLS SUGGEST THAT
LOOKING AT TRAFFIC VOLUMES
SHOULD BE A CONSIDERATION WHEN
CONSIDERING ROAD GUIDES.
THERE IS SORT OF AN
APPROPRIATENESS FOR THE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF TREATMENTS
THAT IT'S NOT NECESSARILY A ONE
SIZE FITS ALL.
SO SO THAT'S ALL TO SAY THAT
COLLECTING VOLUME DATA FOR
EXAMPLE, COLLECTING DATA THAT
ALL FEELS APPROPRIATE WHEN
LOOKING AT ROADSIDE ANALYZES
COULD THAT RESULT?
CAUSBY A LITTLE BIT MORE
HOLISTIC OR OR MORE REFLECT OUR
CURRENT VALUES?
PERHAPS BUT I DON'T KNOW
WHETHER DESERVES REPEAL OR
REPLACE OR YOU KNOW, CHANGE I
WON'T SPECULATE ON ON THAT
AGAIN.
SO THIS IS ONE AREA WHERE I'M
GOING TO HAVE TO SAY KIND
OF SPEAKING ON BEHALF OF OUR
AGENCY THAT KIND OF FULL STEAM
AHEAD IS NOT NECESSARILY GOING
TO BE BENEFICIAL IN ALL CASES
FOR US.
I THINK WHAT WE'VE FOUND IS NOW
THAT THE DOWNTOWN AREA HAS BEEN
RESTRUCTURED AND THERE'S A LOT
MORE INFRASTRUCTURE, HARD
INFRASTRUCTURE IN PLACE WE'RE
COMING INTO ALL SORTS.
WE'RE COMING INTO DIFFERENT
OPERATIONAL ISSUES AND THEY'RE
NOT THE ONES THAT WE WOULD HAVE
EXPECTED.
I WAS EXPECTING, YOU KNOW, THAT
BUSSES ARE GOING TO BE SLOWED
DOWN.
WE'D BE IN TRAFFIC FOREVER.
I MEAN IT THINGS HAVE SLOWED
DOWN A LITTLE BIT BUT NOT
ENOUGH TO TALK ABOUT BUT WHAT
WE'RE WHAT WE'RE COMING UP
AGAINST IS LIKE WHERE THE
BIKEWAYS BEEN PUT IN AND WE
WE'VE EXPERIMENTED WITH THE
CITY AND THE CITY STAFF HAS
BEEN VERY HELPFUL AND VERY
WILLING TO MAKE ACCOMMODATIONS
WHERE THEY CAN WHERE WE PUT
RAISED BUS STOPS IN THE
BIKEWAYS WE'RE NOW HAVING
PROBLEMS WITH CONFLICTS BETWEEN
BIKE RIDERS AND PEOPLE TRYING
TO GET OFF THE BUS BECAUSE EVEN
THOUGH THE BIKE RIDERS ARE
GOING SLOWER RELATIVE TO CARS,
THEY'RE STILL MOVING PRETTY
QUICKLY THROUGH THOSE ZONES.
SO THE OTHER THE OTHER APPROACH
THAT WE'VE BEEN TRYING NOW ON
STATE STREET IS TO BASICALLY
HAVE THE BUSSES PULL UP TO THE
CURB AND GO THERE.
WELL, WE'RE NOW RUNNING INTO
PROBLEMS WITH WHERE THE
DELINEATOR ARE AT AND HOW
COMFORTABLE DRIVERS ARE WITH
THE LANE WIDTH AND ARE THE
DRIVERS COMFORTABLE GOING INTO
A DELINEATED BIKE ZONE AND
TRYING TO CUT IT, USE THEIR
VEHICLE TO CUT OFF ACCESS SO
THAT THEY CAN PULL TO THE CURB?
I THINK THIS IS NOT TO SAY THAT
WE DON'T WANT TO GO FORWARD
WITH THIS STUFF MOVING FORWARD.
BUT I THINK AS WE MOVE INTO
THESE MAJOR CORRIDORS
ESPECIALLY IF WE'RE TALKING
PLIMOTH OR WE'RE TALKING FULLER
OR STUFF LIKE THAT, THOSE ARE
BRT CORRIDORS AND TECHNICALLY
STATE STREET WITH THE BRT
CORRIDOR.
SO I THINK AS WE GO FORWARD
INTO THOSE WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO HAVE SOME CONVERSATIONS AS A
LARGER GROUP ON THE POLICY
LEVEL AND AT THE PROJECT LEVEL
TO TRY TO SORT THROUGH AS WE
PUT THESE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF TREATMENTS IN WHAT ARE SOME
OF THE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
THAT ARE GOING TO HAVE GOING
FORWARD BECAUSE OUR I WE'RE
WE'RE TRYING TO PUT TOGETHER AN
EDUCATIONAL COMPONENT FOR OUR
OPERATORS SO THAT WE CAN TALK
ABOUT THIS IS HOW YOU NEED TO
NAVIGATE THROUGH A BIKE LANE
AREA.
YOU KNOW WHAT WITH DELINEATOR
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME I THINK WE
STILL NEED TO ACKNOWLEDGE AND
THIS IS JUST ME KIND
OF INFORMING YOU GUYS THAT AS
WE GO THROUGH SOME OF THESE
PROJECTS IF WE KIND OF IF IT
FEELS LIKE WE'RE PUSHING BACK A
LITTLE BIT, IT'S NOT BECAUSE WE
DON'T LIKE THE CONCEPT.
IT'S THAT WE HAVE TO KIND
OF RESPECT OUR YOU KNOW, OUR
OPERATOR ENVIRONMENTS AS WELL.
SO WE'RE TRYING TO PUT TOGETHER
SOME EDUCATIONAL COMPONENTS TO
HELP THEM NAVIGATE THROUGH THE
STUFF THAT'S ALREADY OUT THERE.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME WHEN WE GO
INTO THESE MAJOR CORRIDORS, I
JUST WE NEED TO MAKE CLEAR THAT
I THINK SOME OF THE TREATMENTS
THAT WE'RE TRYING RIGHT NOW ARE
PROBABLY NOT GOING TO BE
BENEFICIAL OR THEY'RE PROBABLY
NOT GOING TO WORK OUT IN THE
COURT IN SOME OF THESE MAJOR
CORRIDORS.
SO I'M VERY WILLING ON A STAFF
LEVEL WE'RE TALKING ABOUT HOW
WE COME TOGETHER WITH CITY
STAFF TO KIND OF ADDRESS SOME
OF THESE ON THE STAFF LEVEL.
BUT IF IT'S BENEFICIAL AT SOME
POINT, YOU KNOW, TALKING WITH
MATT OR TALKING WITH OTHER
PEOPLE A LITTLE BIT HIGHER UP
THAN ME, THEY'RE OPEN TO THOSE
IDEAS AS WELL.
SO LIKE I SAID, WE'RE
SUPPORTING THIS BUT WE JUST
WANT YOU GUYS TO KNOW THAT
THEY'RE THERE HAVE BEEN SOME
UNEXPECTED CHALLENGES THAT HAVE
COME OUT OF ALL OF THIS
.
THANKS, KENYA.
I WOULD HOPE THAT WE CONSIDER
THESE IMPROVEMENTS AND CHANGES
TO BE INNOVATIVE AND YOU KNOW,
WE MAINTAIN FLEXIBILITY AND
COOPERATION BETWEEN DIFFERENT
STAKEHOLDERS IN THE CITY.
I BELIEVE THAT I WOULD HOPE
THAT'S HAPPENED ALREADY.
I KNOW THE WILLIAM STREET BIKE
LANE.
I THINK I MOVED AROUND A LITTLE
BIT BY THE DOWNTOWN BRIDGE TO
THE LIBRARY AT ONE POINT TO
HELP US IS TURNING AND SO YEAH,
I WOULD EXPECT AND HOPE THAT
THAT KIND OF COOPERATION
CONTINUES AND I JUST WANT TO
REITERATE THANK YOU FOR CITY
STAFF OR BEING AS FLEXIBLE AS
THAT YOU'RE ABLE AND I WANT TO
THIS COMMISSION AND CITY
COUNCIL DOES NEED TO KNOW THAT
IT'S THE STAFF IS IS VERY, VERY
HELPFUL FOR US.
>> SO I WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT.
>> WELL, THANKS ANYWAY.
THANKS FOR WORKING WITH US AS
WELL.
I KNOW THOSE CAN BE CHALLENGES
WE YOU KNOW, KEN BRINGS UP A
GOOD POINT.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT IS TOP
OF MIND FOR US.
WE WE TRY TO BE VERY SENSITIVE
WHERE WE'RE NOT CREATING AN
ATMOSPHERE WHERE IT'S BIKES
VERSUS BUSSES RIGHT.
BECAUSE WE THINK BOTH OF THOSE
ARE KEY TO OUR CARBONNEUTRAL
NEUTRALITY STRATEGY AS WELL AS
OUR VISION ZERO STRATEGY.
AND SO THEY ARE BOTH PART
OF THE SOLUTION SET AND SO
MAKING SURE WE CAN IDENTIFY
CORRIDORS AND SOLUTIONS CAN
WORK FOR BOTH CAN SOMETIMES
PROVE CHALLENGING AND YOU KNOW,
WE DO WORK WELL AND IS ACTUALLY
FANTASTIC TO WORK WITH AS WELL
AS A LOT OF HIS COLLEAGUES AT
THE RIGHT.
SO WE APPRECIATE THAT
PARTNERSHIP.
WE NEVER DO ANYTHING TO SPITE
TRANSIT.
I KNOW SOMETIMES THERE ARE
SOME, YOU KNOW, PAIN POINTS
THAT OCCUR BUT IT IS SOMETHING
THAT, YOU KNOW, WE LEARN FROM
WITH EVERY PROJECT AND
SOMETIMES IN UNFORESEEN WAYS.
SO I JUST WANT TO THANK KEN MAC
AND FOR HIS WORDS AND THANK HIM
FOR HIS PARTNERSHIP AS WELL AS
WE ANALYZE THESE PROJECTS AND
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS COMMENTS.
ALL RIGHT.
IN THE INTEREST OF TIME MOVING
ALONG TO COMMUNICATIONS FIRST
STEP REPORT UPDATES YOU'VE
RECEIVED A STAFF REPORT
PROVIDING PROJECT UPDATES THE
ORIGINAL MATERIALS.
IT ALSO INCLUDES THE JULY AND
AUGUST PRESS REPORTS FROM THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
AND LASTLY, IT INCLUDES A MEMO
FROM THE D.A. ABOUT THE MILLER
KATHERINE PSYCHOLOGIC STATEMENT
IF YOU COULD REDUCE ITS YES.
SO I'LL JUST GO THROUGH THIS
QUICKLY AGAIN AS USUAL I JUST
HIGHLIGHT THE CHANGES FROM LAST
MONTH TO THIS MONTH ANNUAL
STREET RESURFACING PROJECT.
I THINK THE BIG THING THAT WAS
ADDED WAS SOME INFORMATION
ABOUT WEBSITES.
SO THERE'S THE PROJECT WEBSITE
BEING UPDATED AS WELL AS THE
PROJECT TRACKING DASHBOARD IS
NOW LINKED WITHIN THE REPORT A
CHURCH ROAD THERE'S STILL THE
SIDEWALK THAT WE ARE AWARE
OF THAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN BETWEEN
GREENVIEW AND SEVEN ON THE
NORTH SIDE.
I THINK THE EASEMENT SITUATION
IS CLOSE TO GETTING RESOLVED
WITH NO PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
BUT NICK HUTCHINSON WOULD HAVE
BEEN BETTER TO ADDRESS THAT SO
WE CAN HAVE A BETTER UPDATE FOR
YOU NEXT MONTH IT DARMOUTH
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR ON THIS YOU
KNOW THE CONSTRUCTION STARTED I
MEAN GO PAST THAT AND A THIRTY
UNDERWAY.
>> THANK YOU.
>> GOOD NEWS CONSTRUCTION
UNDERWAY ON THAT ONE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR THAT.
I APPRECIATE IT.
SIDEWALK GAP'S BROADWAY IS
COMPLETE.
>> THIS IS THE BETWEEN YOU ON
THE NORTHWEST SIDE NEWPORT IS
ALSO DOWN FROM SUNSET TO DOWN
UP CIRCLE AND ELSWORTH IS
EXPECTED TO BE COMPLETE THIS
FALL.
THAT'S BETWEEN STATE AND STATE
STREET MOVEMENT
FROM WILLIAMS
YOU'RE ON PHASE ONE WAS
COMPLETED LAST YEAR.
PHASE TWO IS COMPLETE AHEAD
OF SCHEDULE AND JUST SOME MINOR
PUNCH LIST ITEMS REMAIN FLAT
ROAD FROM HERE ON PARKWAY TO
PACHON IS SUBSTANTIALLY
COMPLETE.
THERE ARE STILL SOME SIGNAL
MODIFICATION.
THERE'S GOING TO BE YELLOW
FLASHING LEFT THAT'S STILL IN
THE WORKS BUT ALL THE LANES ARE
OPEN TO TRAVEL AND IT IS OPEN
BROADWAY STREET COMPLIMENTS
OF PLYMOUTH IS ALSO
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE
UNSTRAPPING GATTI'S AVENUE FROM
OBSERVATORY TO HIGHLIGHT IS
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE AND OPEN
TO TRAFFIC STATES AND HILL THE
PORTION OF STATE STREET IS
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE AND OPEN
TO TRAFFIC.
HILL STREET HAS BEEN POSTPONED
TO NEXT YEAR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
PREVIOUSLY S MAIN WATER MAIN
OUR S.
S MAIN STREET WATER MAIN THIS
IS JUST SOUTH OF HERE ON THAT
WORK IS ALSO COMPLETE 7TH
STREET AND GREENVIEW I THINK WE
SENT OUT THE NOTICE THAT THERE
IS A PUBLIC OPEN HOUSE TOMORROW
NIGHT 6:00 PM AT THE PITTSVILLE
BRANCH AND OUR LIBRARY AGAIN
THIS IS JUST AN INFORMATIONAL
SESSION ABOUT WHAT THE FINAL
CONCEPT IS JUST LETTING PEOPLE
KNOW WHAT DIRECTION THAT
PROJECTS AND MILLER AVENUE
THERE IS PUBLIC ENGAGEMENTS
TENTATIVELY SCHEDULED FOR
OCTOBER 19TH.
THIS IS THE SEGMENT BETWEEN
SHAPIN NEWPORT WHEN THERE WILL
BE A SEPARATE COMPLEMENTARY
EFFORT TO POSSIBLY EXTENDING
THE FACILITY TO FIRST STREET TO
THE EAST SO THAT TIES IN WITH
THE CYCLE TRACK AND THEN
HOPEFULLY OUT WEST TO MAPLE AS
WELL.
BUT THAT IS GOING TO BE THROUGH
A SEPARATE EFFORT.
BUT HOPEFULLY IN TERMS
OF TIMELINE PITTSVILLE VILLAGE
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT DESIGN WORK
IS SCHEDULED TO BEGIN SOON.
THE TRUNK LINE JURISDICTION FOR
FRANCE FOR ANALYSIS WE'VE BEEN
MEETING WITH THE CONSULTANT AND
REVIEWING THE COST SIDE OF THE
BENEFIT COST ANALYSIS.
WE ARE HOPING TO CONCLUDE IN
ABOUT TWO MONTHS OR SO AND WE
WILL BE BRINGING THAT TO YOU
WITH THOSE FINDINGS AND OUR
COORDINATION.
WE ARE ALL DONE WITH THE
DESIGN.
WE HAD A COUPLE OF MINOR TWEAKS
BASED ON THE LAST THING THAT WE
GOT BUT THOSE ARE BEING
FINALIZED RIGHT NOW AND THEN
WE'RE SENDING IT OVER TO AND
FOR FINAL REVIEW.
BUT ONCE IT IS APPROVED THEN
HAS TO GO OUT TO THE
DESTRUCTION OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY INNOVATION
INSTALLATION IS UNDERWAY FOR
ARE THERE ANY CHARGES THAT ARE
MOUNTED ON POLES?
SO THIS IS A PILOT PROJECT
SORRY IS ADDRESSED.
FOUR HUNDRED AND FIFTY OUTAGES
SO FAR IN TWENTY TWENTY THREE
AND A TRAFFIC TRACKER PROGRAM.
LET ME START AT THE BOTTOM AND
I ALREADY MENTIONED THIS
EARLIER THAT CITY COUNCIL DID
APPROVE ON SEPTEMBER 5TH THE
RESOLUTION THAT CAME OUT
OF THIS BODY THAT SUGGESTED
CHANGES TO THE TRAFFIC COMING
PROGRAM AND THANK YOU TO THE
AMA FOR SPONSORING THE COUNCIL
RESOLUTION THAT WAS ULTIMATELY
APPROVED.
I HAVE NOT REACHED THE EXISTING
PROGRAM YET.
WE ACTUALLY HAVE A MEETING ON
THE CALENDAR.
I THINK IT'S FOR NEXT WEEK TO
GO THROUGH AND AND THERE'S
GOING TO BE SOME PROCESS
CHANGES, SOME ENGAGEMENT
CHANGES, SOME THINGS THAT HAVE
TO REFLECT THE NATIONAL COUNCIL
.
SO WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
GET AN UPDATED PROGRAM READY SO
THAT NEW PETITIONERS THAT COME
IN AND KNOW WHAT THAT LOOKS
LIKE.
>> SO STAY TUNED ON THAT AND
LET'S SEE EXISTING PROJECTS IN
THE QUEUE.
GRANGER FORCED OLIVIA WAS
INSTALLED GRANGER FROM STATE
PACKARD IS EXPECTED TO BE
CONSTRUCTED HERE IN THE NEXT
COUPLE MONTHS.
MANCHESTER AND GRAND SEE
MANCHESTER AND BALDWIN WERE
APPROVED TWO NIGHTS AGO BY CITY
COUNCIL AND YOU TALKED ABOUT
GRANDVIEW TONIGHT.
I WILL NOTE WE'VE KICKED OFF
THREE OTHER ADDITIONAL PROJECTS
BIRD FROM NEWPORT HERE ON
AGRELLA FROM SIGGINS PAULINE
AND HENRY FROM GOLDENER PACARD
HAVE ALL KICKED OFF AS WELL.
ONE THING I JUST WANT TO
HIGHLIGHT IN THE SPACE SO THE
GOOD NEWS IS WITH YOUR ACTION
TONIGHT TO RECOMMEND APPROVAL
OF GRANDVIEW THAT MARKS THE
SIXTH PETITION WE'VE PROCESSED
THIS YEAR.
THAT'S GOOD NEWS .
BAD NEWS IS WE ARE QUICKLY
EATING UP OUR BUDGET ESPECIALLY
WITH THE TWO CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS THAT WE MANAGED TO GET
IN TO VERSION TWO SECONDS
OF RANGER SO WE MIGHT HIT A
BUDGETARY WALL BEFORE TOO LONG
AND IT'S ONLY SEPTEMBER.
WE'RE ONLY TWO AND A HALF
MONTHS INTO THE FISCAL YEAR AND
WE MIGHT RUN OUT OF BUDGET.
SO JUST WANTED TO LET YOU KNOW
THAT IF YOU DO SEE A SLOWDOWN
IN THE PROGRAM BECAUSE WE HAVE
AS MUCH AS WE CAN WITH THE
BUDGET ALLOTTED TO US UM THEN
SOME TRANSPORTATION
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN UPDATES
SUSANN PRESENTED TONIGHT AND
TREVOR BRIGHTON OUR OUR OTHER
TRANSPORTATION PLANNER DOING
INTERCEPT SURVEYS AROUND THE
CLOCK BUILDS JUST TRYING TO SEE
WHAT THOSE EXPERIENCES ARE LIKE
FOR USERS AND WE ARE WORKING
WITH HRC ON THE NEXT ROUND
OF QUICK BUILDS.
AS I MENTIONED THIS WILL BE TO
TAKE THE OFFER BIKE LANES AND
TURN THEM INTO PROTECTIVE CYCLE
TRACKS.
LAST I HEARD FROM CYRUS IT'S
ABOUT 90 PERCENT DESIGN
COMPLETE SO HOPEFULLY THAT'LL
WRAP UP HERE SHORTLY AND THEN
WE CAN PUT THAT OUT TO BUILD
THE BIKE CORRALS WE HAVE NOW
THE RYEGRASS IN POSSESSION AND
WE WERE TOLD BY THE FOLKS THAT
ARE IN CHARGE OF PERMITTING
THAT ERM IT WILL GO LIVE NEXT
WEEK.
SO ULTIMATELY WHAT WE'RE
LOOKING TO DO IS AT TWELVE
DIFFERENT LOCATIONS WE SHOULD
BE ABLE TO MOUNT OR NO I'M
SORRY TEN DIFFERENT LOCATIONS
WE SHOULD BE ABLE TO MOUNT
THESE BIKE RACK SO WE HAVE THE
FIRST LOCATION WE ALREADY HAVE
AN JUST A BUSINESS WE THINK
WILL PARTNER WITH BUT AGAIN
SPREAD THE WORD IF YOU KNOW
OF OTHERS AND AS SOON AS THAT
PERMIT IS ONLINE I CAN SAY SO
AS A WAY TO DIRECT PEOPLE WORLD
CAR FREE DAY KICKS ON FRIDAY.
SO THIS IS A WEEK LONG EVENT IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH OUR TEAM THE
OFFICES IN INNOVATION DOWNTOWN
WHICH REALLY IT'S KIND LIKE A
COMMUTER CHALLENGE IF YOU
PARTICIPATED IN THOSE REALLY
LOOKING FOR PEOPLE TO USE OTHER
MODES OF TRANSPORTATION ASIDE
FROM SINGLE OCCUPANCY VEHICLES.
SO IF YOU AREN'T REGISTERED FOR
THAT PLEASE DO SO IT'S ALWAYS A
GOOD WAY FOR US TO QUANTIFY HOW
MANY PEOPLE ARE USING ACTIVE
FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION IN
TRANSIT TO GET AROUND TOWN
CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM WE
REPORTED IN THE PAST THAT WE
GOT A GRANT FROM SOME OF THE
COMMISSION AND COUNCIL
GOVERNMENTS FOR ONE POINT ONE
MILLION DOLLARS FOR A COUPLE
OF DIFFERENT PROJECTS RIGHT NOW
THE ONE THAT WE'RE WORKING ON
IS CONVERSION OF STREET LIGHTS
FROM HIGH PRESSURE SODIUM WHICH
ARE LESS EFFICIENT TO LIGHT
EMITTING DIODE OR LED LIGHTS
WE'RE PROBABLY WELL WHAT WE'RE
HOPING TO DO IS GET A SAMPLE
SET THAT WE CAN PILOT SO
DIFFERENT COLOR TEMPERATURES
AND DIFFERENT WATTAGES SO GET
SOME IMPRESSIONS ABOUT WHICH
EXTRA WE WANT BEFORE WE IN
ORDER FOR FIVE THOUSAND LIGHTS.
SO WE WANT TO MAKE SURE WE GET
IT RIGHT SO WE DON'T HAVE TO
REDO FIVE THOUSAND.
SO STAY TUNED IN THAT SPACE
WE'RE STILL TALKING ABOUT WITH
OFFERINGS ARE AND WE'RE TRYING
TO FIGURE OUT WHERE TO PUT
THOSE AS WELL CRASHES YES.
WE INCLUDED THE CRASH REPORT
FOR JULY AND THEN WE ALSO
GRABBED THE AUGUST ONE AS WELL.
I THINK IN THE PAST THERE WAS
SOME CONCERN THAT WE WEREN'T
SHARING THOSE IN A TIMELY
FASHION.
A LOT OF IT JUST HAS TO DO WITH
WHEN THE COUNCIL PACKET VERSUS
YOUR POCKET.
THOSE WERE ALWAYS A COUPLE
OF DAYS OUT AHEAD OF THAT.
SO BUT WE WE HOLD THE AUGUST
REPORT AND UPLOADED IT I THINK
ON MONDAY THANKS TO CHRIS.
>> SO THOSE ARE INCLUDED IN THE
PACKET AND THEN INCLUDE AN
IMPACT.
IT IS ALSO A MEMO FROM THE
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
I THINK THERE WAS SOME
CONVERSATIONS OVER THE LAST
MONTH, A TWO MONTHS ABOUT THE
EXPERIENCE OF SAFETY ON
KATHARYN ESPECIALLY RELATED TO
VEHICLES ACROSS THE CYCLE
TRACK.
SO THE A WITH YOUR CONSULTING
WENT THROUGH AND DID SOME
ANALYSIS IN TERMS OF WHAT THAT
CRASH PATTERN LOOKS LIKE AND
PRETTY MUCH THE CONCLUSION IS
THAT EARLY DAYS INDICATES THAT
THE BIKEWAYS ARE BOTH WELL USED
AND EFFECTIVE IN MEETING VISION
ZERO GOALS THE CRASH PATTERN IN
QUESTION WHICH AGAIN IS VERY
FAILING TO YIELD TO PEOPLE LIKE
YOU WALKING IS NOT OCCURRING
FREQUENTLY EVEN IF YOU SAW THE
SORT OF COMMENTS FROM THE
PERSON AT COUNCIL THEY ADMITTED
THAT IT WAS A NO INJURY CRASH
OR YOU KNOW, IT WASN'T A SEVERE
CRASH WHICH AGAIN IS PART
OF THE OUTCOME WE'RE LOOKING SO
TO THAT LAST POINT OVERALL
CRASH SEVERITY AND FREQUENCY
HAS DECREASED FOLLOWING THE
BIKEWAY INSTALLATION.
IF YOU WANT TO LEARN MORE ABOUT
THAT MEMO WAS INCLUDED IN THE
SO THAT'S I'M HAPPY TO
ENTERTAIN ANY QUESTIONS YOU
MIGHT HAVE QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS
.
>> I KNOW I EMAILED YOU ABOUT
THIS EARLIER BUT ALSO I'VE
HEARD FROM SOME RESIDENTS AND
JUST SOMETHING SEEMS REALLY NOT
RIGHT WITH THE RECENT RAISE
CROSSWALK BETWEEN GRANGER LS
FLAT I BIKED OVER OVER THE
WEEKEND AND IT JUST FEELS LIKE
OF THE PAINT AND I WONDERED IF
IF MAYBE THE CONTRACTOR GOT IT
WRONG AND IF THAT'S BEEN SEEN
I'M SORRY WAS THE LAST PART
SEEN AS WHAT
CITY STAFF IS
ACTUALLY TAKING A LOOK AT IT.
>> YEAH WE'VE BEEN OUT IN THE
FIELD EVEN DURING INSTALLATION
AND SO YEAH THANK YOU FOR
BRINGING THIS UP.
>> WE ARE FINDING RES
CROSSWALKS IN THE INTERSECTION
CAN POSE SOME DIFFICULTIES IN
IMPLEMENTATION DEPENDING UPON
WHAT THE EXISTING ROAD
CHARACTERISTIC IS, ESPECIALLY
THE GEOMETRIES OF A ROADWAY.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE FEEL
PRETTY ADAMANT ABOUT
MAINTAINING OR FOCUSING ON IS
ADA COMPLIANCE MAKING SURE THAT
THE CROSSWALK CATCHES ALL THE
SLOPES AND CROSS FLOWS.
SO THAT IS ONE OF THE FIRST
DEFINING DOMESTIQUES EVEN
BEFORE WE DEFINE WHAT THE SPEED
SHOULD LOOK AND FEEL LIKE, WE
REALLY NEED TO IDENTIFY WITH
THAT CROSSWALK EXPERIENCE
SHOULD BE LIGHT AND THEN ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT'S
INTERESTING IS THE SAP WHO WAS
OUT THERE DURING CONSTRUCTION
EXPLAINED TO ME GRANGER
ACTUALLY CHANGES A LITTLE BIT
IN THE SHORT DISTANCE BETWEEN
FORCE AND OLIVIA.
THERE ARE SO THE EXPERIENCE
OVER ONCE BE VERY DIFFERENT
THAN THE EXPERIENCE FROM THE
OTHER AND IT'S EVEN DIFFERENT
DEPENDING ON THE APPROACH
BECAUSE THE ROAD KIND OF SLOPES
UNDERSTAND IT FROM THE THE S IS
I THINK A LITTLE BIT HIGHER
THAN THE NORTH SIDE OF THE ROAD
AND SO TRYING TO MEET THOSE
GRADIENTS ESPECIALLY FOR THAT
ADA COMPLIANCE PROVED
CHALLENGING.
SO THEY DID THE BEST THAT THEY
COULD TO KIND OF CREATE SOME
LIFTS AND SOME OTHER THINGS
THAT WOULD HAVE THE EFFECT.
I HAVE HEARD SAME CONCERNS FROM
RESIDENTS AND OTHERS THAT IT
DOESN'T SEEM TO BE ACHIEVING
THE DESIRED TRAFFIC CALMING
EFFECT.
I DON'T QUITE KNOW.
WE MIGHT HAVE TO HAVE AN
INTERNAL DISCUSSION TO SEE WHAT
OTHER OPTIONS ARE AVAILABLE TO
US, BUT I I DON'T QUITE KNOW
WHAT THE REMEDY IS AT THIS
TIME.
IT'S IT'S YOU KNOW, FOR IF WE
TRY TO FIX ONE THING WE BRING
THE HEIGHT OF THE CROSS OR IF
WE BRING THE HEIGHT OF THE
SPEED UP AND WE MIGHT BE ABLE
TO ACHIEVE THE OTHER ADA
COMPLIANCE SO THAT THESE ARE
SOME OF THE DESIGN CHALLENGES
THAT WE AND ONE OF THE THING
I'LL NOTE IS TRAFFIC CALMING
TYPICALLY IS NOT ENGINEER
DESIGN.
WE DON'T DO A PLAN SET.
THEY'RE KIND OF THERE.
THEY MAKE THE THEY THEY KIND
DESIGN THEM IN THE FEEL BECAUSE
WHEN THE CREWS ARE OUT THERE
THEY GO AHEAD GO AHEAD AND YOU
KNOW, DETERMINE THE BASED ON
HOW TO MAKE THE CONNECTIONS AND
SO WHEN THEY WERE OUT THERE IN
THE FIELD WORKING WITH THIS ONE
,THIS WAS KIND OF THE BEST
THEY COULD DO GIVEN THE
ENVIRONMENT, THE CONDITIONS
THAT THEY HAD TO WORK WITH.
SO I SUSPECT GIVEN SOME OF THE
CONVERSATIONS THAT ARE
HAPPENING THAT WILL BE FORCED
TO LOOK AT IT AGAIN AND YEAH.
SO THERE'S SORRY TO BRING IT UP
BUT IT WHEN I WENT OVER IT WAS
JUST NOT MY EXPERIENCE WITH
SOME OF THE OTHER TREATMENTS
THAT I'VE SEEN SO THANKS FOR
BRINGING THAT UP.
>> I PREFERRED BUT APPRECIATE
APPRECIATE THE DISCUSSION ON
THAT AND ANY OTHER COMMENTS OR
QUESTIONS.
RIGHT.
LET'S SEE ARE REPORTS ANY
COMMISSIONERS WHO SPECIFICALLY
SERVE AS A LIAISON TO ANOTHER
BODY OR ORGANIZATION IF YOU
WOULD LIKE TO PROVIDE ANY THREE
REPORTS OR UPDATES RIGHT NOW ON
YEAH SURE.
I'LL MAKE THIS PRETTY BRIEF THE
DUPA VILLAGE OF BANABA WENT
THROUGH PLANNING COMMISSION.
THERE IS AN ADDITIONAL ONE
HUNDRED TWENTY UNITS SO A TOTAL
OF SIX HUNDRED FOUR UNITS
OF PONTIAC AND JUHAN.
SO I KNOW PONTIAC TRAIL IS
ALWAYS A LITTLE BIT
OF CONNECTIVITY ISSUES BUT ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WE THOUGHT
WAS GOOD WAS THAT IT CONNECTS
LESLI SO THERE'S GOING TO BE
KIND OF A THOROUGHFARE BICYCLE
IN YORK CITY FOR PATHWAY'S BUT
JUST WANTED TO YOU GUYS A HEADS
UP THERE ARE MORE I THINK NO
RIGHT TURN ON RED AND IT'S BEEN
RECEIVED PRETTY WELL.
THE PLANNING COMMISSION IS
TAKING ACTION ON UNCAPPING FARC
.
IT'S GOING TO GO TO CITY
COUNCIL I THINK NEXT.
SO HIGHER DENSITIES BASICALLY
IN DOWNTOWN.
SO I THINK THE NO RED ACTUALLY
CAME IN TIME AND THEN THE LAST
THING IS THAT THERE WAS A
PUBLIC NOTICE THAT RAN OUT FOR
THE BIG BRIARWOOD SEARS
REDEVELOPMENT.
SO THAT IS ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
SQUARE FOOT SPORTING STORE WITH
A FIELD.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I
THOUGHT WAS NEW FROM THE PUBLIC
HEARING THAT THEY DID BACK IN
APRIL OR SOMETHING IS THAT
THERE'S GOING TO BE LIKE A ROAD
THAT KIND OF LIKE BISECTS
THROUGH THE PARKING LOT.
SO I THOUGHT THAT WAS
INTERESTING.
I'M EXCITED TO SEE THE DESIGNS
BUT JUST GIVING YOU GUYS A
HEADS UP ON THAT ONE JUST BUT
OTHER THAN THAT THAT'S IT.
>> THANKS.
THANK YOU.
ANYONE CAN OK SO I WANT TO END
ON A CAT NOT SOMETHING LIKE
HE'S COMPLAINING NOTE GOT A
COUPLE POSITIVE THINGS HERE SO
TWENTY FOUR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
MILLAGE PLAN IN OCTOBER WE'RE
GOING TO BEGIN PUBLIC INPUT SO
IT'S GOING TO RUN
OCTOBER TWENTY THIRD THROUGH
NOVEMBER TWENTY THIRD THERE
WILL BE SEVERAL IN-PERSON
OPPORTUNITIES TO PROVIDE PUBLIC
INPUT.
WE'RE PUTTING THE SCHEDULE FOR
THAT TOGETHER RIGHT NOW.
THERE'S ALSO GOING TO BE
SEVERAL ONLINE OPPORTUNITIES
AND THEN OF COURSE IF YOU WANT
TO SUBMIT THROUGH EMAIL SNAIL
MAIL OR TELEPHONE OR TELEGRAPH
OR ANYTHING LIKE THAT, YOU'RE
WELCOME TO DO THOSE AS WELL.
AND SO WHAT THAT THE PROJECT
THAT THAT'S REFERRING TO THE
MILLET'S SERVICES THAT THE
MILITARY EXPANDED SERVICES THAT
ARE GOING TO BE PROVIDED AS A
RESULT OF THE AFIRM TWENTY TWO
MELICK SO THAT MEANS AN EXPRESS
ROUTE BETWEEN ANN ARBOR AND
YPSILANTI EXPANDED SERVICES,
EXPANDED HOURS OF SERVICE ON
SEVEN DAYS A WEEK INCLUDING
SIGNIFICANT WEEKENDS, HOURS
OF SERVICE EXPANSION AND THEN
INCREASING SERVICE ON EVERY
ROUTE THAT OPERATES ON SATURDAY
AND SUNDAY UP TO EVERY THIRTY
MINUTES.
AND THEN THE SECOND THING I
HAVE TO REPORT IS THERE'S NOT A
LOT OF NOTES HERE BUT
APPARENTLY COMING UP AT THE
OCTOBER BOARD MEETING OUR CEO
IS GOING TO BE GIVING A
RECOMMENDED ACTION TO THE BOARD
ON HOW WE'RE GOING TO PROCEED
WITH ZERO MISSION BUS
PROPULSION EVEN I DON'T KNOW
WHAT THAT ONE IS YET SO STAY
TUNED.
>> THAT SHOULD BE INTERESTING
TO SEE WHAT COMES OUT OF THAT.
THANK YOU.
ANYONE ELSE, BRAD?
I THINK LARRY HAS YES.
I'VE READ THAT I'VE RAISED MY
HAND AND A COUPLE OF THINGS
THAT THE COMMISSION WANTED TO
BRING TO THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION ATTENTION BECAUSE WE
DON'T KNOW WHERE TO GO.
>> WHAT THE THINGS IS.
WE'RE AND I THINK ONE OF OUR
YOU ONE IS GOING TO TRY TO GET
IN TOUCH WITH YOU TOO, MR. THE
WE WANT TO KNOW WHAT KIND
OF EDUCATION IS GO ON BECAUSE A
LOT OF PEOPLE INCLUDING MYSELF
HAVE BEEN ENCOUNTERING BY
TRAFFIC ON THE SIDEWALKS WHY
THEY HAVE BIKE LANES AND I'VE
HAD MY CANES CLIPPED A COUPLE
OF TIMES.
ANOTHER PERSON IS ALMOST HAD A
DOG HIT BY BIKES AND YOU KNOW,
IT'S WE GOT THE BIKE LANES OUT
THERE.
WE'RE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
WHERE WE GO WITH THIS SIDEWALK
SAFETY ISSUE BECAUSE WE DON'T
MIND THE BIKES BUT WE DON'T
WANT THEM RIGHT NOW WITH
SIDEWALKS AND RUNNING INTO US.
THE SECOND ISSUE AND WE ALSO
NEED TO FIND A PLACE TO GO WITH
THIS IS SOMEONE ALMOST GOT HIT
ARE VISUALLY IMPAIRED PERSON
ALMOST GOT HIT AND I GUESS A
COUPLE OTHER PEOPLE ALMOST GOT
HIT ON THIS OR THEY WERE COMING
OUT OF THE CARS GOING ON TO THE
ANDRE THERE'S A SEVEN SECOND
LIGHT BUT IT'S ON AND OBVIOUSLY
ROAD AND NINETY FOUR SO WE
THINK THAT MIGHT BE UNDER DLT
AND THEN THE THIRD THING IS
MORE OF AN ANNOUNCEMENT I'VE
BEEN ASKED BY THE
CLASS LOCAL
ADVISORY COMMITTEE SEE TO LET
YOU KNOW THAT WE'RE A SUBURB,
WE'RE ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO AAA
AND WE'VE HAD A LOT OF CHANGES.
SO WE'VE BEEN I'VE BEEN ASKED
TO DO SAY THAT WE'RE RECRUITING
THAT WE'RE ASKING PEOPLE THAT
WANT TO VOLUNTEER TO GET IN
TOUCH WITH ROBERT WILLIAMS AT
OUR WILLIAMS TWENTY FIFTH AT
THE RIG SO THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
KIND OF EXPLORING THE FIRST TWO
ISSUES AND THE THIRD ONE WAS
JUST THE THING THAT I'D BEEN
ASKED TO DO BY LACEY.
I THANK YOU, LARRY.
ANYONE ELSE THAT'S OVER LESNES
ALL RIGHT.
CALL FOR AGENDA ITEMS PLEASE
EMAIL US ANY TIME WITH IDEAS
FOR AGENDA ITEMS.
I'D LIKE TO SAY THAT I HAD TO
LEAVE THE MEETING A LITTLE BIT
EARLIER BUT SHE DID WANT TO
PASS ALONG A REQUEST FOR A
FUTURE AGENDA ITEM, A
RESOLUTION TO ASK COUNCIL TO
STUDY POLICY THAT ALL MULTILINE
ROADS IN ANN ARBOR SHOULD BE
SLATED BLAME REDUCTIONS OR
CONVERSION TO BUS ONLY LANES
WITH A FEASIBLE AGGRESSIVE
TIMELINE JUST LETTING EVERYONE
KNOW THAT THAT WAS A SUGGESTION
OR AN AGENDA ITEM THAT MOLLY
HAD POSTED IN THE CHAT TO RIGHT
.
AND IF I MAY JUST A COUPLE
OF OTHER THINGS WE EXPECT TO
COME TO YOU WITH NEXT MONTH.
THERE'S THE CRASH REPORT WE
HAVE UPDATED THE CRASH
DASHBOARD.
>> IF YOU'VE HAD A CHANCE TO
VISIT THAT WEBSITE, IT'S IN OUR
WEBSITE TO UPGRADE FLASH CRASH
REPORTING.
THE MAP HAS BEEN UPDATED AS
TOOL BY REQUEST.
I HAVE A VIEW THAT IF YOU CAN
SEND ME IN THE NEXT TWO WEEKS,
IF YOU HAVE ANY SPECIFIC
ANALYSIS YOU WOULD LIKE US TO
PERFORM, PLEASE LET US KNOW
WHAT THAT WOULD BE BECAUSE
TYPICALLY WHAT WE DO IS WE GIVE
YOU KIND OF A BIG PICTURE
OVERVIEW AND THEN WE SOMETIMES
WE'LL DO A DEEP DOVE ON A
SUBJECT SO LET US KNOW WHAT
THAT TYPE OF SUBJECT IS.
SO THEN THAT WAY WE WANT TO
BRING SOMETHING TO YOU NEXT
MONTH AND WE CAN SELECT WHAT
YOU'RE CURIOUS ABOUT ALSO OUR
TRACKING TRUNK LINE TRANSFER
MAYBE NEXT MONTH MAYBE A MONTH
AFTER AND THEN I'M WORKING WITH
THE JOHN WATERMAN FROM THE
PROGRAM EDUCATING ALL CYCLISTS
,POSSIBLY GIVING A
PRESENTATION AS WELL.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
YEAH.
EVERYONE PLEASE IF YOU HAVE ANY
REQUESTS FOR WHAT YOU'D LIKE TO
SEE OUT OF THE CRASH REPORT,
LET THE LIKE JUST I'D BE MUCH
APPRECIATED.
>> ALL RIGHT.
NEXT MEETING WILL BE HELD ON
WEDNESDAY OCTOBER 18TH.
TWENTY TWENTY THREE AT SEVEN
P.M. IT WILL ALSO BE A VIRTUAL
SO IF THERE ARE NO OBJECTIONS
WE WILL ADJOURN OUR SEPTEMBER
TWENTIETH TWENTY TWENTY THREE
MEETING SAYING NO OBJECTIONS.
THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU.
GOOD NIGHT.
THANK EVERYBODY.
CAN I